                                              ON THE NON-EXISTENCE OF ELEMENTS OF KERVAIRE
                                                              INVARIANT ONE
arXiv:0908.3724v4 [math.AT] 25 May 2015




                                                               M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL

                                                                            Dedicated to Mark Mahowald


                                                   Abstract. We show that the Kervaire invariant one elements θj ∈ π2j+1 −2 S 0
                                                   exist only for j ≤ 6. By Browder’s Theorem, this means that smooth framed
                                                   manifolds of Kervaire invariant one exist only in dimensions 2, 6, 14, 30, 62, and
                                                   possibly 126. Except for dimension 126 this resolves a longstanding problem
                                                   in algebraic topology.




                                                                                     Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                              1
                                             2. Equivariant stable homotopy theory                                                        8
                                             3. Mackey functors, homology and homotopy                                                   35
                                             4. The slice filtration                                                                     44
                                             5. The complex cobordism spectrum                                                           63
                                             6. The Slice Theorem and the Reduction Theorem                                              76
                                             7. The Reduction Theorem                                                                    80
                                             8. The Gap Theorem                                                                          88
                                             9. The Periodicity Theorem                                                                  89
                                             10. The Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem                                                       101
                                             11. The Detection Theorem                                                                  103
                                             Appendix A. The category of equivariant orthogonal spectra                                 118
                                             Appendix B. Homotopy theory of equivariant orthogonal spectra                              143
                                             References                                                                                 217



                                                                                1. Introduction
                                             The existence of smooth framed manifolds of Kervaire invariant one is one of
                                          the oldest unresolved issues in differential and algebraic topology. The question
                                          originated in the work of Pontryagin in the 1930’s. It took a definitive form in the
                                          paper [41] of Kervaire in which he constructed a combinatorial 10-manifold with no
                                          smooth structure, and in the work of Kervaire-Milnor [42] on h-cobordism classes

                                             M. A. Hill was partially supported by NSF grants DMS-0905160 , DMS-1307896 and the Sloan
                                          foundation.
                                             M. J. Hopkins was partially supported the NSF grant DMS-0906194.
                                             D. C. Ravenel was partially supported by the NSF grants DMS-1307896 and DMS-0901560.
                                             All three authors received support from the DARPA grants HR0011-10-1-0054-DOD35CAP
                                          and FA9550-07-1-0555.
                                                                                           1
2                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


of manifolds homeomorphic to a sphere. The question was connected to homotopy
theory by Browder in his fundamental paper [13] where he showed that smooth
framed manifolds of Kervaire invariant one exist only in dimensions of the form
(2j+1 − 2), and that a manifold exists in that dimension if and only if the class
                                         j+1
                             h2j ∈ Ext2,2
                                      A        (Z/2, Z/2)
in the E2 -term of the classical Adams spectral represents an element
                                  θj ∈ π2j+1 −2 S 0
in the stable homotopy groups of spheres. The classes h2j for j ≤ 3 represent the
squares of the Hopf maps. The element θ4 ∈ π30 S 0 had been observed in existing
computations [56, 52, 60], and was constructed explicitly as a framed manifold by
Jones [39]. The element θ5 ∈ π60 S 0 was constructed by Barratt-Mahowald, and
Barratt-Jones-Mahowald (see [9] and the discussion therein).
   The purpose of this paper is to prove the following theorem
                                                      j+1
Theorem 1.1. For j ≥ 7 the class h2j ∈ Ext2,2 A     (Z/2, Z/2) does not represent
an element of the stable homotopy groups of spheres. In other words, the Kervaire
invariant elements θj do not exist for j ≥ 7.
   Smooth framed manifolds of Kervaire invariant one therefore exist only in di-
mensions 2, 6, 14, 30, 62, and possibly 126. At the time of writing, our methods
still leave open the existence of θ6 .
   Many open issues in algebraic and differential topology depend on knowing
whether or not the Kervaire invariant one elements θj exist for j ≥ 6. The fol-
lowing results represent some of the issues now settled by Theorem 1.1. In the
statements, the phrase “exceptional dimensions” refers to the dimensions 2, 6, 14,
30, 62, and 126. In all cases the situation in the dimension 126 is unresolved.
By Browder’s work [13] the results listed below were known when the dimension
in question was not 2 less than a power of 2. Modulo Browder’s result [13] the
reduction of the statements to Theorem 1.1 can be found in the references cited.
Theorem 1.2 ([42, 46]). Except in the six exceptional dimensions, every stably
framed smooth manifold is framed cobordant to a homotopy sphere.            
   In the first five of the exceptional dimensions it is known that not every sta-
bly framed manifold is framed cobordant to a homotopy sphere. The situation is
unresolved in dimension 126.
Theorem 1.3 ([42]). Let M m be the manifold with boundary constructed by plumb-
ing together two copies of the unit tangent bundle to S 2k+1 (so m = 4k + 2), and
set Σm−1 = ∂M m . Unless m is one of the six exceptional dimensions, the space
M m /Σm−1 is a triangulable manifold which does not admit any smooth structure,
and the manifold Σm−1 (the Kervaire sphere) is homoemorphic but not diffeomor-
phic to S m−1 .                                                                 
   In the first five of the exceptional cases, the Kervaire sphere is known to be
diffeomorphic to the ordinary sphere, and the Kervaire manifold can be smoothed.
Theorem 1.4 ([42, 46]). Let Θn be the Kervaire-Milnor group of h-cobordism
classes of homotopy n-spheres. Unless (4k + 2) is one of the six exceptional dimen-
sions,
                                Θ4k+2 ≈ π4k+2 S 0
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  3


and
                              |Θ4k+1 | = ak π4k+1 S 0 ,
where ak is 1 if k is even, and 2 if k is odd.
Theorem 1.5 ([8]). Unless n is 1, or one of the six exceptional dimensions, the
Whitehead square [ιn+1 , ιn+1 ] ∈ π2n+1 S n+1 is not divisible by 2.         
1.1. Outline of the argument. Our proof builds on the strategy used by the
third author in [70] and on the homotopy theoretic refinement developed by the
second author and Haynes Miller (see [73]).
   We construct a multiplicative cohomology theory Ω and establish the following
results:
Theorem 1.6 (The Detection Theorem). If θj ∈ π2j+1 −2 S 0 is an element of Ker-
                                                                      j+1
vaire invariant 1, and j > 2, then the “Hurewicz” image of θj in Ω2−2 (pt) is
non-zero.
Theorem 1.7 (The Periodicity Theorem). The cohomology theory Ω is 256-fold
periodic: For all X,
                          Ω∗ (X) ≈ Ω∗+256 (X).
Theorem 1.8 (The Gap Theorem). The groups Ωi (pt) are zero for 0 < i < 4.
  These three results easily imply Theorem 1.1. The Periodicity Theorem and the
Gap Theorem imply that the groups Ωi (pt) are zero for i ≡ 2 mod 256. By the
                                                                        j+1
Detection Theorem, if θj exists it has a non-zero Hurewicz image in Ω2−2 (pt).
But this latter group is zero if j ≥ 7.

1.2. The cohomology theory Ω. Write Cn for the cyclic group of order n. Our
cohomology theory Ω is part of a pair (Ω, ΩO ) analogous to the orthogonal and
unitary K-theory spectra KO and KU . The role of complex conjugation on KU
is played by an action of C8 on ΩO , and Ω arises as its fixed points. It is better to
think of ΩO as generalizing Atiyah’s C2 -equivariant KR -theory [7], and in fact ΩO
is constructed from the corresponding real bordism spectrum, as we now describe.
   Let M UR be the C2 -equivariant real bordism spectrum of Landweber [43] and
Fujii [24]. Roughly speaking one can think of M UR as describing the cobordism
theory of real manifolds, which are stably almost complex manifolds equipped with
a conjugate linear action of C2 , such as the space of complex points of a smooth
variety defined over R. A real manifold of real dimension 2n determines a homotopy
class of maps
                                   S nρ2 → M UR
where nρ2 is the direct sum of n copies of the real regular representation of C2 , and
S nρ2 is its one point compactification.
   Write
                       M U ((C8 )) = M UR ∧ M UR ∧ M UR ∧ M UR
for the C8 -equivariant spectrum gotten by smashing 4 copies of M UR together and
letting C8 act by
                                                ¯ a, b, c).
                               (a, b, c, d) 7→ (d,
Very roughly speaking, M U ((C8)) can be thought of as the cobordism theory of
stably almost manifolds equipped with a C8 -action, with the property that the
4                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


restriction of the action to C2 ⊂ C8 determines a real structure. If M is a real
manifold then M × M × M × M with the C8 -action
                                               ¯ a, b, c)
                              (a, b, c, d) 7→ (d,
is an example. A suitable C8 -manifold M of real dimension 8n determines a homo-
topy class of maps
                                  S nρ8 → M U ((C8 )) ,
where nρ8 is the direct sum of n copies of the real regular representation of C8 , and
S nρ8 is its one point compactification.
   To define Ω we invert an equivariant analogue
                                D : S ℓρ8 → M U ((C8 ))
of the Bott periodicity class and form the C8 -equivariant spectrum ΩO = D−1 M U ((C8 ))
(in fact ℓ works out to be 19). The cohomology theory Ω is defined to be the ho-
motopy fixed point spectrum of the C8 -action on ΩO .
   There is some flexibility in the choice of D, but it needs to be chosen in order
that the Periodicity Theorem holds, and in order that the map from the fixed point
spectrum of ΩO to the homotopy fixed point spectrum be a weak equivalence. It
also needs to be chosen in such a way that the Detection Theorem is preserved
(see Remark 11.14). That such an D can be chosen with these properties is a
relatively easy fact, albeit mildly technical. It is specified in Corollary 9.21. It can
be described in the form M × M × M × M for a suitable real manifold M , though
we do not do so.
1.3. The Detection Theorem. Since the non-equivariant spectrum ΩO underly-
ing ΩO is complex orientable, the inclusion of the unit S 0 → Ω induces a map

                       Exts,t
                          MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )
                                                     =⇒   πt−s S 0


                                                            
                            H s (C8 ; πt ΩO )       =⇒    πt−s Ω
from the Adams-Novikov spectral sequence to the C8 homotopy fixed point spec-
tral sequence for π∗ Ω. In §11.3.3 we give an ad hoc construction of this spectral
sequence, conveniently adapted to describing the map of E2 -terms. It gives the
horizontal arrow in the diagram of spectral sequences below.
                                                       C8 homotopy
                    Adams-Novikov               /       fixed point
                   spectral sequence
                                                     spectral sequence

                            
                    Classical Adams
                   spectral sequence

The Detection Theorem is proved by investigating this diagram, and follows from
a purely algebraic result.
Theorem 1.9 (Algebraic Detection Theorem). If
                                       j+1
                           x ∈ Ext2,2
                                  MU∗ (MU) (M U∗ , M U∗ )
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                    5


is any element mapping to h2j in the E2 -term of the classical Adams spectral se-
quence, and j > 2, then the image of x in H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO ) is nonzero.
   The restriction j > 2 is not actually necessary, but the other values of j require
separate arguments. Since we do not need them, we have chosen to leave them to
the interested reader.
    To deduce the Detection Theorem from the Algebraic Detection Theorem sup-
                   j+1
pose that θj : S 2 −2 → S 0 is a map represented by h2j in the classical Adams
spectral sequence. Then θj has Adams filtration 0, 1 or 2 in the Adams-Novikov
spectral sequence, since the Adams filtration can only increase under a map. Since
both               j+1                                    j+1
                       −2                                     −1
            Ext0,2
                MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )      and Ext1,2  MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )
are zero, the class θj must be represented in Adams filtration 2 by some element x
which is a permanent cycle. By the Algebraic Detection Theorem, the element x has
a non-trivial image bj ∈ H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO ), representing the image of θj in π2j+1 −2 Ω.
If this image is zero then the class bj must be in the image of the differential
                    d2 : H 0 (C8 ; π2j+1 −1 ΩO ) → H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO ).
But πodd ΩO = 0, so this cannot happen.
   The proof of the Algebraic Detection Theorem is given in §11. The method of
proof is similar to that used in [70], where an analogous result is established at
primes greater than 3.
1.4. The slice filtration and the Gap Theorem. While the Detection Theorem
and the Periodicity Theorem involve the homotopy fixed point spectral sequence for
Ω, the Gap Theorem results from studying ΩO as an honest equivariant spectrum.
What permits the mixing of the two approaches is the following result, which is
part of Theorem 10.8.
Theorem 1.10 (Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem). The map from the fixed point
spectrum of ΩO to the homotopy fixed point spectrum of ΩO is a weak equivalence.
  In particular, for all n, the map
                               πnC8 ΩO → πn ΩhC
                                             O
                                                8
                                                  = πn Ω
is an isomorphism, in which the symbol πnC8 ΩO denotes the group of equivariant
homotopy classes of maps from S n (with the trivial action) to ΩO .
   We study the equivariant homotopy type of ΩO using an analogue of the Post-
nikov tower. We call this tower the slice tower. Versions of it have appeared in
work of Dan Dugger [20], Hopkins-Morel (unpublished), Voevodsky[83, 81, 82], and
Hu-Kriz [35].
   The slice tower is defined for any finite group G. For a subgroup K ⊂ G, let ρK
denote its regular representation and write
                          b
                         S(m,  K) = G+ ∧ S mρK        m ∈ Z.
                                           K

Definition 1.11. The set of slice cells (for G) is
                       b
                      {S(m,         b
                            K), Σ−1 S(m, K) | m ∈ Z, K ⊂ G}.
Definition 1.12. A slice cell Sb is free if it is of the form G+ ∧ S m for some m. An
isotropic slice cell is one which is not free.
6                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


    We define the dimension of a slice cell Sb by
                                    b
                               dim S(m,   K) = m|K|
                                     b
                             dim Σ−1 S(m, K) = m|K| − 1.
Finally the slice section P n X is constructed by attaching cones on slice cells Sb with
dim Sb > n to kill all maps Sb → X with dim Sb > n. There is a natural map
                                      P n X → P n−1 X
The n-slice of X is defined to be its homotopy fiber Pnn X.
   In this way a tower {P n X}, n ∈ Z is associated to each equivariant spectrum
X. The homotopy colimit holimn P n X is contractible, and holimn P n X is just X.
                               −→                                ←−
The slice spectral sequence for X is the spectral sequence of the slice tower, relating
π∗ Pnn X to π∗ X.
   The key technical result of the whole paper is the following.
Theorem 1.13 (The Slice Theorem). The C8 -spectrum Pnn M U ((C8 )) is contractible
if n is odd. If n is even then Pnn M U ((C8)) is weakly equivalent to HZ ∧ W , where
HZ is the Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum associated to the constant Mackey functor
Z, and W is a wedge of isotropic slice cells of dimension n.
   The Slice Theorem actually holds more generally for the spectra M U ((C2k ))
formed like M U ((C8 )) , using the smash product of 2k−1 copies of M UR . The more
general statement is Theorem 6.1
   The Gap Theorem depends on the following result.
Lemma 1.14 (The Cell Lemma). Let G = C2n for some n 6= 0. If Sb is an isotropic
slice cell of even dimension, then the groups πkG HZ ∧ Sb are zero for −4 < k < 0.
   This is an easy explicit computation, and reduces to the fact that the orbit space
S mρG /G is simply connected, being the suspension of a connected space.
   Since the restriction of ρG to a subgroup K ⊂ G is isomorphic to (|G/K|) ρK
there is an equivalence
                    S mρG ∧ (G+ ∧ S nρK ) ≈ G+ ∧ S (n+m|G/K|)ρK .
                                  K                K

It follows that if Sb is a slice cell of dimension d, then for any m, S mρG ∧ Sb is a slice
cell of dimension d + m|G|. Moreover, if Sb is isotropic, then so is S mρG ∧ S.    b The
Cell Lemma and the Slice Theorem then imply that for any m, the group
                                 πiC8 S mρC8 ∧ M U ((C8 ))
is zero for −4 < i < 0. Since
                           πiC8 ΩO = lim πi S −mℓρC8 M U ((C8 ))
                                     −→
this implies that
                                 πiC8 ΩO = πi Ω = 0
for −4 < i < 0, which is the Gap Theorem.
   The Periodicity Theorem is proved with a small amount of computation in the
RO(C8 )-graded slice spectral sequence for ΩO . It makes use of the fact that ΩO is an
equivariant commutative ring spectrum. Using the nilpotence machinery of [17, 32]
instead of explicit computation, it can be shown that the groups π∗ Ω are periodic
with some period which a power of 2. This would be enough to show that only
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  7


finitely many of the θj can exist. Some computation is necessary to get the actual
period stated in the Periodicity Theorem.
   All of the results are fairly easy consequences of the Slice Theorem, which in
turn reduces to a single computational fact: that the quotient of M U ((C8 )) by the
analogue of the “Lazard ring” is the Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum HZ associated
to the constant Mackey functor Z. We call this the Reduction Theorem and its
generalization to C2n appears as Theorem 6.5. It is proved for G = C2 in Hu-
Kriz [35], and the analogue in motivic homotopy theory is the main result of the
(unpublished) work of the second author and Morel mentioned earlier, where it is
used to identify the Voevodsky slices of M GL. It would be very interesting to find
a proof of Theorem 6.5 along the lines of Quillen’s argument in [69].
   During the long period between revisions of this paper, Haynes Miller’s Bourbaki
talk on this material has appeared [64]. We refer the reader there for a incisive
overview.

1.5. Summary of the contents. We now turn to a more detailed summary of
the contents of this paper. In §2 we recall the basics of equivariant stable homotopy
theory, establish many conventions and explain some simple computations. One of
our main new constructions, introduced in §2.2.3 is the multiplicative norm functor.
We merely state our main results about the norm, deferring the details of the proofs
to the appendices. Another useful technique, the method of twisted monoid rings,
is described in §2.4. It is used in constructing convenient filtrations of rings, and
in forming the quotient of an equivariant commutative ring spectrum by a regular
sequence, in the situation in which the group is acting non-trivially on the sequence.
   Section 4 introduces the slice filtration, and establishes many of its basic proper-
ties, including the strong convergence of the slice spectral sequence (Theorem 4.42),
and an important result on the distribution of groups in the E2 -term (Corol-
lary 4.43). The notions of pure spectra, isotropic spectra, and spectra with cellu-
lar slices are introduced in §4.6.2. In these terms, the Slice Theorem states that
M U ((C2n )) is both pure and isotropic. Most of the material of these first sections
makes no restriction on the group G.
   From §5 forward we restrict attention to the case in which G is cyclic of order
a power of 2, and we localize all spectra at the prime 2. The spectra M U ((G)) are
introduced and some of the basic properties are established. The groundwork is
laid for the proof of the Slice Theorem. The Reduction Theorem (Theorem 6.5) is
stated in §6. The Reduction Theorem is the backbone of the Slice Theorem, and is
the only part that is not “formal” in the sense that it depends on the outcome of
certain computations.
   The Slice Theorem is also proved in §6, assuming that the Reduction Theorem
holds. The proof of the Reduction Theorem is in §7. The Gap Theorem in proved
in §8, the Periodicity theorem in §9. The Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem is proved
in §10, and the Detection Theorem in §11.
   The paper concludes with two appendices devoted to foundations of equivariant
stable homotopy theory. Two factors contribute to the length of this material. One
is simply the wish to make this paper as self-contained as possible and to collect
material central to our investigation in one place. The other reason is that our
methods rely on multiplicative aspects of equivariant stable homotopy theory that
do not appear in the existing literature. Establishing the basic properties of these
structures involve details of the foundations and cannot be done at the level of user
8                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


interface. Because of this, a relatively complete account of equivariant orthogonal
spectra is required.

1.6. Acknowledgments. First and foremost the authors would like to thank Ben
Mann and the support of DARPA through the grant number FA9550-07-1-0555. It
was the urging of Ben and the opportunity created by this funding that brought the
authors together in collaboration in the first place. Though the results described
in this paper were an unexpected outcome of our program, it’s safe to say they
would not have come into being without Ben’s prodding. As it became clear that
the techniques of equivariant homotopy theory were relevant to our project we
drew heavily on the paper [35] of Po Hu and Igor Kriz. We’d like to acknowledge
a debt of influence to that paper, and to thank the authors for writing it. We
were also helped by the thesis of Dan Dugger (which appears as [20]). The second
author would like to thank Dan Dugger, Marc Levine, Jacob Lurie, and Fabien
Morel for several useful conversations. Early drafts of this manuscript were read
by Mark Hovey, Tyler Lawson, and Peter Landweber, and the authors would like
to express their gratitude for their many detailed comments. We also owe thanks
to Haynes Miller for a very thoughtful and careful reading of our earlier drafts, and
for his helpful suggestions for terminology. Thanks are due to Stefan Schwede for
sharing with us his construction of M UR , to Mike Mandell for diligently manning
the hotline for questions about the foundations of equivariant orthogonal spectra,
to Andrew Blumberg for his many valuable comments on the second revision, and
to Anna Marie Bohmann and Emily Riehl for valuable comments on our description
of “working fiberwise.”
   Finally, and most importantly, the authors would like to thank Mark Mahowald
for a lifetime of mathematical ideas and inspiration, and for many helpful discus-
sions in the early stages of this project.

                  2. Equivariant stable homotopy theory
   We will work in the category of equivariant orthogonal spectra [54, 53]. In this
section we survey some of the main properties of the theory and establish some
notation. The definitions, proofs, constructions, and other details are explained in
Appendices A and B. The reader is also referred to the books of tom Dieck [80, 79],
and the survey of Greenlees and May [26] for an overview of equivariant stable
homotopy theory, and for further references.
   We set up the basics of equivariant stable homotopy theory in the framework
of homotopical category in the sense of [21]. A homotopical category is a pair
(C, W) consisting of a category C and a collection W of morphisms in C called
weak equivalences containing all identity maps, and satisfying the “two out of six
property” that in the situation
                                    u    v    w
                                  •−
                                   →•−
                                     →•−
                                       →•
if vu and wv are in W then so are u, v, w, and vwu. Any class W defined as
the collection of morphisms u taken to isomorphisms by some fixed functor au-
tomatically satisfies this property. This holds in particular when W consists of
the weak equivalences in a model category structure. In this situation we will say
that the model structure refines the homotopical category structure, and that the
homotopical category is completed to a model category structure.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 9


   Associated to a homotopical category (C, W) is the homotopy category ho C and
the functor C → ho C, characterized uniquely up to unique isomorphism by the
following universal property: for every category D, and every functor F : C → D
taking the stable weak equivalences as isomorphisms, there is a unique functor
ho C → D making the diagram
                                    C❈      / ho C
                                      ❈❈
                                        ❈❈
                                          ❈
                                       F ❈❈ 
                                              !
                                                D
commute. See §B.1 for more on the theory of homotopical categories, for a descrip-
tion of the issues that arise when doing homotopy theory in a homotopical category,
the techniques for dealing with them, and for an explanation of the notion of left
(L) and right (R) derived functors appearing in the discussion below.

2.1. G-spaces. We begin with unstable equivariant homotopy theory. Let G be
a finite group, and T G the topological category of pointed compactly generated,
weak Hausdorff left G-spaces and spaces of equivariant maps. The category T G
is a closed symmetric monoidal category under the smash product operation. The
tensor unit is the 0-sphere S 0 equipped with the trivial G-action.
    We call a category enriched over T G a G-equivariant topological category. Since
it is closed monoidal, T G may be regarded as enriched over itself. We denote the
enriched category by T G . Thus T G is the G-equivariant topological category of
G-spaces and G-spaces of continuous, not necessarily equivariant maps, on which
G acts by conjugation. There is an isomorphism
                             T G (X, Y ) = T G (X, Y )G .
See §A.1.3 and §A.2.1 for further background and discussion.
  The homotopy set (group, for n > 0) πnH (X) of a pointed G-space is defined for
H ⊂ G and n ≥ 0 to be the set of H-equivariant homotopy classes of pointed maps
                                     S n → X.
This is the same as the ordinary homotopy set (group) πn (X H ) of the space of H
fixed-points in X.
   A map f : X → Y in T G is a weak equivalence if for all H ⊂ G the map
X → Y H of H-fixed point spaces is an ordinary weak equivalence. Equivalently,
   H

f : X → Y is a weak equivalence if for all H ⊂ G and all choices of base point
x0 ∈ X H the induced map πnH (X, x0 ) → πnH (Y, f (x0 )) is an isomorphism. Equipped
with the weak equivalences, the category underlying T G becomes a homotopical
category. It can be completed to a topological model category in which a fibration is
a map X → Y which for every H ⊂ G is a Serre fibration on fixed points X H → Y H .
The smash product of G-spaces makes T G into a symmetric monoidal category in
the sense of Schwede-Shipley [75, Definition 3.1], and T G into an enriched model
category.
   Every pointed G-space is weakly equivalent to a G-CW complex constructed
inductively from the basepoint by attaching equivariant cells of the form G/H × Dn
along maps from G/H × S n−1 .
   We will write both
                            ho T G (X, Y ) and [X, Y ]G
10                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


for the set of maps from X to Y in the homotopy category of T G . When X is
cofibrant and Y is fibrant this can be calculated as the set of homotopy classes of
maps from X to Y in T G
                       [X, Y ]G = π0 T G (X, Y ) = π0G T G (X, Y ).
   We will make frequent use of finite dimensional real orthogonal representations
of G. To keep the terminology simple these will be referred to as representations
of G.
   An important role is played by the equivariant spheres S V arising as the one point
compactification of representations V of G. When V is the trivial representation
of dimension n, S V is just the n-sphere S n with the trivial G-action. We combine
these two notations and write
                                                     n
                                   S V +n = S V ⊕R .
     Associated to S V is the equivariant homotopy set
                                   πVG X = [S V , X]G
defined to be the set of homotopy classes of G-equivariant maps from S V to X.
The set πVG X is a group if dim V > 0 and an abelian group if dim V G > 1, where
V G is the space of G-invariant vectors in V .
    Also associated to the sphere S V one has the equivariant suspension ΣV X =
S ∧ X and the equivariant loop space ΩV X = T G (S V , X).
  V

    Now suppose that V1 and V2 are two orthogonal representations of G and that
for each irreducible representation U of G occurring in V1 one has
(2.1)                   dim homG (U, V2 ) ≥ dim homG (U, V1 ).
Then one may choose an equivariant linear isometric embedding t : V1 → V2 and
form
(2.2)                                πVG2 −t(V1 ) (X),
in which V2 −t(V1 ) denotes the orthogonal complement of the image of V1 in V2 . The
groups (2.2) form a local system over the Stiefel manifold O(V1 , V2 )G of equivariant
linear isometric embeddings. If instead of (2.1) the one has V2 > V1 in the sense of
Definition 2.3 below, then the Stiefel manifold O(V1 , V2 ) is simply connected and
one may define
                                     πVG2 −V2 (X)
to be the group of global sections of this local system. For any t ∈ O(V1 , V2 )G the
restriction map gives a canonical isomorphism πVG2 −V2 (X) → πVG2 −t(V1 ) (X).
Definition 2.3. Let V1 and V2 be two non-zero G-representations. We write V1 <
V2 if for every irreducible G-representation U ,
                      dim homG (U, V1 ) < dim homG (U, V2 ) − 1.
   This relation makes the set of G-representations into a (large) partially ordered
set.
   We will shortly (§2.2.4) be interested in the special case in which V1 is a trivial
representation of dimension k. As above we will write
                                       πVG2 −k (X)
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               11


for this group. In this way, for any n ∈ Z there is a well-defined group
                                     πVG+n (X)
provided dim V G ≥ −n + 2.
2.2. Equivariant stable homotopy theory. There is a choice to be made when
stabilizing equivariant homotopy theory. If one only seeks that fibration sequences
and cofibration sequences become weakly equivalent, then one stabilizes in the usual
way, using suspensions by spheres with trivial G-action. But if one wants to have
Spanier-Whitehead duals of finite G-CW complexes, one needs to stabilize with
respect to the spheres S V where V is a finite dimensional representation of G.
   We will do equivariant stable homotopy theory in the category of equivariant or-
thogonal spectra, equipped with the stable weak equivalences. In order for this to
be considered viable some properties must be established that guarantee computa-
tions made with equivariant orthogonal spectra ultimately reduce to computations
in ho T G in the expected manner. We therefore begin by discussing the equivari-
ant Spanier-Whitehead category, and formulate six properties an equivariant stable
homotopy should satisfy in order that it faithfully extend the Spanier-Whitehead
category. These properties aren’t enough for all of our purposes, so after estab-
lishing them for equivariant orthogonal spectra we turn the more refined structures
(indexed products, coproducts, and smash products) that we require.
2.2.1. Spanier-Whitehead stabilization. The G-equivariant Spanier-Whitehead cat-
egory SWG is the category whose objects are finite pointed G-CW complexes and
with maps
                       {X, Y }G = lim[S V ∧ X, S V ∧ Y ]G ,
                                    −→
                                     V
in which the colimit is taken over the partially ordered set of G-representations.
For an informative discussion of this category the reader is referred to [5].
   There is a direct analogue [5, 84] of Spanier-Whitehead duality in SWG , in which
a finite based G-CW complex embedded in a representation sphere S V is “V -dual”
to the unreduced suspension of its complement.
Example 2.4. Suppose that X is a finite pointed G-set B. If there is an equivariant
embedding B ⊂ S V (for instance when V is the G-representation with basis B) the
V -dual of B works out to be S V ∧ B.
   If one wants finite G-CW complexes to have actual duals, in the sense of ob-
jects in a symmetric monoidal category, then one must enlarge the category SWG
by formally adding, for each finite G-CW complex Y and each finite dimensional
representation V of G, an object S −V ∧ Y defined by
(2.5)                   {X, S −V ∧ Y }G = {S V ∧ X, Y }G .
Since {S V ∧ ( − ), Y }G is a functor on SWG , this amounts to simply working in an
enlargement of the Yoneda embedding of SWG . One checks that for any Z, the map
Z → S −V ∧ S V ∧ Z corresponding to the identity map of S V ∧ Z under (2.5) is an
isomorphism, and that symmetric monoidal structure given by the smash product
extends to this enlarged category. If X and Y are V -duals in SWG , then X and
S −V ∧ Y are duals in the enlarged equivariant Spanier-Whitehead category.
Example 2.6. From Example 2.4, B is self-dual in the enlarged equivariant Spanier-
Whitehead category.
12                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   As in the non-equivariant case, the equivariant Spanier-Whitehead category still
suffers the defect that it is also not quite set up for doing stable homotopy the-
ory. What one wants is a complete closed symmetric monoidal category SG of
G-equivariant spectra, equipped with the structure of a homotopical category (or
even a Quillen model category), and related to T G by a pair of adjoint (suspension
spectrum and zero space) functors

                                 Σ ∞ : T G ⇆ SG : Ω ∞ .
In order to know that computations made in this category reduce in the expected
manner to those in classical stable homotopy theory, one would like this data to
satisfy
                        ∞
     SpG
       1 The functors Σ   and Ω∞ induce adjoint functors

                             LΣ∞ : ho T G ⇆ ho SG : RΩ∞ .
         on the homotopy categories.
                                                 G
     SpG
       2 The symmetric monoidal structure on S induces a closed symmetric monoidal
         structure on the homotopy category ho SG and the functor LΣ∞ is sym-
         metric monoidal.
                          ∞
     SpG
       3 The functor LΣ     extends to a fully faithful, symmetric monoidal embed-
                     G
         ding of SW into ho SG .
                        V
     SpG
       4 The objects S     are invertible in ho SG under the smash product, so in
         particular the above embedding of SWG extends to an embedding of the
         extended Spanier-Whitehead category.
                                                          G
     SpG
       5 Arbitrary coproducts (denoted ∨) exist in ho S and can be computed by
         the formation of wedges. If {Xα } is a collection of objects of SG and K is
         a finite G-CW complex, then the map
                        M                               _
                            ho SG (K, Xα ) → ho SG (K, Xα )
                         α                                α

         is an isomorphism.
                                                                  G
     SpG
       6 Up to weak equivalence every object X is presentable in S as a homotopy
         colimit
                    · · · → S −Vn ∧ XVn → S −Vn+1 ∧ XVn+1 → · · · ,
          in which {Vn } is a fixed increasing sequence of representations eventually
          containing every finite dimensional representation of G, and each XVn is
          weakly equivalent to an object of the form Σ∞ KVn , with KVn a G-CW
          complex.
   These properties aren’t meant to constitute a characterization of SG , though
they nearly do. The first five insist that SG not be too small, and the last that it
not be too big. Combined they show that, any computation one wishes to make in
ho SG can, in principle, be reduced to a computation in SWG .
   In all of the common models, and in particular in equivariant orthogonal spectra,
the presentation SpG 6 is functorial. We call this the canonical homotopy presenta-
tion. It is described in detail in §B.4.3. For many purposes one can ignore most of
the technical details of equivariant spectra, and just think in terms of the canonical
homotopy presentation.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                13


    Finally, unless the emphasis is on foundations, we will drop the L and R and
implicitly assume that all of the functors have been derived, unless otherwise spec-
ified.
2.2.2. Equivariant orthogonal spectra. An orthogonal G-spectrum consists of a col-
lection of pointed G-spaces XV indexed by the finite dimensional orthogonal rep-
resentations V of G, an action of the orthogonal group O(V ) (of non-equivariant
maps) on XV , and for each (not necessarily G-equivariant) orthogonal inclusion
t : V ⊂ W a map S W −t(V ) ∧ XV → XW , in which W − t(V ) denotes the orthogonal
complement of the image of V in W . These maps are required to be compatible
with the actions of G and O(V ). Maps of equivariant orthogonal spectra are defined
in the evident manner. For a more careful and detailed description see A.2.4.
    Depending on the context, we will refer to orthogonal G-spectra as “equivariant
orthogonal spectra,” “orthogonal spectra,” “G-spectra,” and sometimes just as
“spectra”.
    As with G-spaces, there are two useful ways of making the collection of G-spectra
into a category. There is the topological category SG just described, and the G-
equivariant topological category SG of equivariant orthogonal spectra and G-spaces
                                  ¯
of non-equivariant maps. Thus for equivariant orthogonal spectra X and Y there
is an identification
                              SG (X, Y ) = SG (X, Y )G .
                                           ¯
We will use the abbreviated notation S to denote SG when G is the trivial group.
    If V and W are two orthogonal representations of G the same dimension, and
O(V, W ) is the G-space of (not necessarily equivariant) orthogonal maps, then
                            O(V, W )+ ∧ XV → XW
                                       O(V )

is a G-equivariant homeomorphism. In particular an orthogonal G-spectrum X is
determined by the XV with V a trivial G-representation. This implies that the
category SG is equivalent to the category of objects in S equipped with a G-action
(Proposition A.19).
   Both SG and SG are tensored and cotensored over G-spaces:
                ¯
                               (X ∧ K)V = XV ∧ K
                                      
                                  X K V = (XV )K .
Both categories are complete and cocomplete.
Definition 2.7. The suspension and 0-space functors are defined by
                                (Σ∞ K)V = S V ∧ K
                                   Ω∞ X = X{0}
where {0} is the zero vector space.
   The suspension spectrum functor is left adjoint to the 0-space functor. One has
Σ∞ K = S 0 ∧ K and more generally Σ∞ (K ∧ L) = (Σ∞ K) ∧ L. The functors
Σ∞ and Ω∞ may be regarded as topological functors between T G and SG or as
T G -enriched functors relating T G and SG .
                                         ¯
   For each G-representation V there is a G-spectrum S −V characterized by the
existence of a functorial equivariant isomorphism
(2.8)                           SG (S −V , X) ≈ XV
                                ¯
14                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


(see §A.2.4). By the enriched Yoneda Lemma, every equivariant orthogonal G-
spectrum X is functorially expressed as a reflexive coequalizer
              _                                   _
(2.9)           S −W ∧ SG (S −W , S −V ) ∧ XV ⇒      S −V ∧ XV → X.
                        ¯
             V,W                                          V

We call this the tautological presentation of X.
   The category SG is a closed symmetric monoidal category under the smash prod-
uct operation. The tensor unit is the sphere spectrum S 0 . There are canonical
identifications
                               S −V ∧ S −W ≈ S −V ⊕W ,
and in fact the association
                                          V 7→ S −V
is a symmetric monoidal functor from the category of finite dimensional represen-
tations of G (and isomorphisms) to SG . Because of the tautological presentation,
this actually determines the smash product functor (see §A.2.5).
   Regarding the adjoint functors
                                  Σ ∞ : T G ⇆ SG : Ω ∞ ,
the left adjoint Σ∞ is symmetric monoidal. We will usually drop the Σ∞ and either
not distinguish in notation between the suspension spectrum of a G-space and the
G-space itself, or use S 0 ∧ K.

2.2.3. Change of group and indexed monoidal products. The fact that the category
SG is equivalent to the category of objects in S equipped with a G-action has an
important and useful consequence. It means that if a construction involving spectra
happens to produce something with a G-action, it defines a functor with values in
G-spectra. For example, if H ⊂ G is a subgroup, there is a restriction functor
i∗H : SG → SH given by simply restricting the action to H. This functor has both
a left and a right adjoint. The left adjoint is given by
                                      X 7→ G+ ∧ X
                                                   H

and may be written as a “wedge”
                                            _
                                                  Xi
                                          i∈G/H

where Xi = (Hi )+ ∧ X with Hi ⊂ G the coset indexed by i. Similarly, the right
                       H
adjoint is given by the H-fixed points of the internal function spectrum from G to
X, and may be written as a kind of product
                                Y            Y
                                     Xi ≈         Xi .
                                  i∈H\G           i∈G/H

        i          H       i          i
where X = hom (H , X) and H is the left H-coset with index i. The identifi-
cation of the two expressions is made using the map g 7→ g −1 . There is also an
analogous construction involving the smash product
                                          ^
                                  G
                                NH  X=        Xi
                                                i∈G/H

These are special cases of a more general construction.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              15


   Suppose that G is a finite group, and J is a finite set on which G acts. Write
BJ G for the category with object set J, in which a map from j to j ′ is an element
g ∈ G with g · j = j ′ . We abbreviate this to BG in case J = pt. Given a functor

                                   X : BJ G → S

define the indexed wedge, indexed product and indexed smash product of X to be
                        _           Y               ^
                            Xj ,       Xj , and        Xj
                        j∈J         j∈J               j∈J

respectively. The group G acts naturally on the indexed wedge and indexed smash
product and so they define functors from the category of BJ G-diagrams of spectra
to SG . For more details, see §A.3.2.
   Suppose that H is a subgroup of G and J = G/H. In this case the inclusion
B{e} H → BJ G of the full subcategory containing the identity coset is an equiva-
lence. The restriction functor and its left Kan extension therefore give an equiva-
lence of the category of BJ G-diagrams of spectra with SH . Under this equivalence,
the indexed wedge works out to be the functor

                                    G+ ∧ ( − ).
                                          H

The indexed smash product is the norm functor
                                   G
                                  NH : SH → SG ,

sending an H-spectrum X to the G-spectrum
                                  ^
                                       Xj .
                                    j∈G/H

                                                                          G
Remark 2.10. When the context is clear, we will sometimes abbreviate the NH
simply to N in order to avoid clustering of symbols.

   The norm distributes over wedges in much the same way as the iterated smash
product. A precise statement of the general “distributive law” appears in §A.3.3.
                   G
   The functor NH     is symmetric monoidal, commutes with sifted colimits, and
so filtered colimits and reflexive coequalizers (Proposition A.53). The fact that
V 7→ S −V is symmetric monoidal implies that
                                                  G
                                G −V
(2.11)                         NH S  = S − indH V ,

where indGH V is the induced representation. From the definition, one also concludes
that for a pointed G-space T ,
                                           G
                        G
                       NH S −V ∧ T = S − indH V ∧ NH
                                                   G
                                                     T,
          G
where NH    T is the analogous norm functor on spaces.
   Th norm first appeared in group cohomology (Evens [23]), and is often referred
to as the “Evens transfer” or the “norm transfer.” The analogue in stable homotopy
theory originates in Greenlees-May [27].
16                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


2.2.4. Stable weak equivalences. The inequality of Definition 2.3 gives the collec-
tion of finite dimensional orthogonal G-representations the structure of a (large)
partially ordered set. When V1 is the trivial representation of dimension k the
condition V2 > V1 means that
(2.12)                              dim V2G > k + 1,
and we will use instead the abbreviation V2 > k. Using (2.12) we extend this to all
k ∈ Z.
   Suppose we are given X ∈ SG , K ∈ T G , and two representations V1 < V2 .
Choose an equivariant isometric embedding t : V1 → V2 and let W be the orthogonal
complement of t(V1 ) in V2 . Define
(2.13)                   [S V1 ∧ K, XV1 ]G → [S V2 ∧ K, XV2 ]G
by using the identification S W ∧S V1 ≈ S V2 and the structure map S W ∧XV1 → XV2
to form the composite
         [S V1 ∧ K, XV1 ]G → [S W ∧ S V1 ∧ K, S W ∧ XV1 ]G → [S V2 ∧ K, XV2 ]G .
This map depends only on the path component of t in O(V1 , V2 )G , so the condition
V1 < V2 implies that (2.13) is independent of the choice of t.
Definition 2.14. Let X be a G-spectrum and k ∈ Z. For H ⊂ G the H-equivariant
k th stable homotopy group of X is the group
(2.15)                          πkH X = lim πVH+k XV ,
                                        −→
                                        V >−k

in which the colimit is taken over the partial ordered set of orthogonal G-representations
V satisfying V > −k.
   The poset of G-representations is a class, not a set, so one must check that the
colimit (2.15) actually exists.
Definition 2.16. An increasing sequence Vn ⊂ Vn+1 ⊂ · · · of finite dimensional
representations of G is exhausting if any finite dimensional representation V of G
admits an equivariant embedding in some Vn .
   Any exhausting sequence · · · ⊂ Vn ⊂ Vn+1 ⊂ · · · is final in the poset of G-
representations, so the map
                           lim πVHn +k XVn → lim πVH+k XV
                           −→                −→
                            n                 V >−k

is an isomorphism. This gives the existence of the colimit (2.15), and shows that
πkH X can be computed as

                                πkH X = lim πVHn +k XVn
                                        −→
                                          n

in which · · · ⊂ Vn ⊂ Vn+1 ⊂ · · · is any choice of exhausting sequence.
Definition 2.17. A stable weak equivalence (or just weak equivalence, for short) is
a map X → Y in SG inducing an isomorphism of stable homotopy groups πkH for
all k ∈ Z and H ⊂ G.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 17


   Equipped with the stable weak equivalences, the category SG becomes a homo-
topical category in the sense of [21], and so both the homotopy category ho SG and
the functor SG → ho SG are defined. As with G-spaces, we will often employ the
notation
                                        [X, Y ]G
for ho SG (X, Y ). See §B.1 for more on the theory of homotopical categories, and for
an explanation of the notion of left (L) and right (R) derived functors appearing
in the discussion below.

2.2.5. Properties SpG      G                                        G      G
                      1 -Sp6 . We now describe how properties Sp1 -Sp6 are veri-
fied, deferring most of the technical details to Appendix B. The first five properties
assert things only about the homotopy category and, save the fact that the sym-
metric monoidal structure is closed, they can be established using only the language
of homotopical categories.
                                                                               ∞
   For SpG  1 , one checks directly from the definition that the functor Σ       pre-
serves weak equivalences between G-spaces with non-degenerate base points, so
that LΣ∞ X can be computed as Σ∞ X if X has a non-degenerate base point, or as
Σ∞ X̃ in general, where X̃ is formed from X by adding a whisker at the base point.
The right derived functor RΩ∞ is given by choosing any exhausting sequence and
forming
                               RΩ∞ X = holim ΩVn XVn
                                             −→
(See Proposition B.24). Verifying that LΣ∞ and RΩ∞ are adjoint functors makes
use of formula (2.18) below.
   Regarding the symmetric monoidal structure (SpG     2 ), the smash product is not
known to preserve weak equivalences between all objects but it does so on the
full subcategory of SG × SG consisting of pairs (X, Y ) for which one of X or Y is
cellular in the sense that it constructed inductively, starting with ∗ and attaching
cells of the form G+ ∧ S −V ∧ D+m
                                  , with V a representation of H. Every G-spectrum
                    H
receives a functorial weak equivalence from a cellular object, so this is enough to
induce a symmetric monoidal smash product on ho SG . See §B.3.7. The fact that
the symmetric monoidal structure is closed is best understood in the context of
model categories. See §B.4.2, and especially Corollary B.80.
                                                         G
   For SpG3 , there is a useful formula for maps in ho S   in good cases. Choose
an exhausting sequence {Vn }. For K a finite G-CW complex, ℓ ∈ Z, and any
Y ∈ SG the definition of stable weak equivalence and some elementary facts about
homotopical categories lead to the formula (Proposition B.44)
(2.18)               ho SG (S ℓ ∧ K, Y ) = lim[S Vn +ℓ ∧ K, YVn ]G ,
                                           −→n

Using this one easily checks that functor K 7→ S 0 ∧ K extends to a symmet-
ric monoidal functor SWG → ho SG . A little more work gives the generalization
(Proposition B.49)
(2.19)             ho SG (S −V ∧ K, Y ) = lim[S Vn ∧ K, YV ⊕Vn ]G ,
                                          −→n

in which V a representation of G,
   For any representations V , W of G, and any X ∈ SG , the map
                                S −V ∧ S V ∧ X → X
18                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is a weak equivalence (Proposition B.30). This ultimately implies that S V is in-
vertible in ho SG (Corollary B.48). This establishes SpG
                                                       4 .
   The fact that the formation of arbitrary wedges preserves weak equivalences
gives the first part of Property SpG 5 (Corollary B.23). The second part follows
from (2.18).
   The canonical homotopy presentation of SpG    6 is constructed by choosing an
exhausting sequence V = {Vn } and letting Xn be an equivariant CW approximation
to XVn . Since it involves more than just the homotopy category, the construction
is easier to describe with a model category structure in place. For the details see
§B.4.3.
   Indexed monoidal products have convenient homotopy properties in SG . The
formation of indexed wedges is homotopical (Definition B.7), in the sense that it
preserves weak equivalences. This means that it need not be derived. The same is
true of the formation of finite indexed products. The map
                                   _       Y
                                     Xα →     Xα
                                    α              α

from a finite indexed wedge to a finite indexed product is always a weak equivalence.
This means in particular that for H ⊂ G, the map from the left to the right adjoint
of the restriction functor
                                       SG → SH
is always a weak equivalence. Thus for X ∈ SG and Y ∈ SH there are isomorphisms
                                       Y     G
(2.20)             [X, G+ ∧ Y ]G ≈ X,       Yi ≈ [i∗H X, Y ]H .
                            H
                                             i∈G/H

The composite is the Wirthmüller isomorphism. Because of it, the right adjoint to
the restriction functor tends not to appear explicitly when discussing the homotopy
category.
   Up to weak equivalence, indexed smash products can be computed using cel-
lular approximations. Combining this with the properties of the norm listed in
                                          G
§2.2.3 leads to a useful description of NH  X in terms of the canonical homotopy
presentation
                                                   G
                          G
                         NH X = holim S − indH Vn ∧ NH
                                                     G
                                                       XVn .
                                  −→
                                        Vn

     Finally, note that the formula (2.18) also implies that for any k ∈ Z
                     πkH X ≈ ho SH (S k , X) ≈ ho SG (G+ ∧ S k , X)
                                                         H
                                               k
where for k > 0 S −k is defined to be S −R with Rk the trivial representation.

2.2.6. The model structure. Not all of the functors one wishes to consider have
convenient homotopy theoretic properties.
Example 2.21. For a G-spectrum X let
                                  Symn X = X ∧n /Σn
be the orbit spectrum of the n-fold iterated smash product by the action of the
symmetric group. The map
                                S −1 ∧ S 1 → S 0
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                   19


is a weak equivalence. However, the induced map
                            Symn (S −1 ∧ S 1 ) → Symn S 0
is not. The right side is S 0 since it is the tensor unit, while the left side works out
(Proposition B.117) to be weakly equivalent to the suspension spectrum of classify-
ing space for G-equivariant principal Σn -bundles, pointed by a disjoint basepoint.
  In order to go further it is useful to refine the homotopical category structure on
SG to a model category. Let Acof be the set of maps
                                       n−1
(2.22)            Acof = {G+ ∧ S −V ∧ S+   → G+ ∧ S −V ∧ D+
                                                          n
                                                            }
                               H                          H
in which H ⊂ G is a subgroup of G and V is a representation of H containing
a non-zero invariant vector. The set Acof is the set of generating cofibrations in
the positive complete model structure on SG . The weak equivalences are the stable
weak equivalences and the fibrations are the maps having the right lifting property
against the acyclic cofibrations. See §B.4.1 for more details.
   It works out that the symmetric power construction is homotopical on the class
of cofibrant objects in the positive complete model structure (Proposition B.113).
Remark 2.23. The condition that V contains a non-zero invariant vector is the pos-
itivity condition. It is due to Jeff Smith, and arose first in the theory of symmetric
spectra (see the paragraph following Corollary 0.6 in [54]). The choice is dictated
by two requirements. One is that symmetric power construction sends weak equiv-
alences between cofibrant objects to weak equivalences. This is the key point in
showing that the forgetful functor from commutative algebras in SG to SG creates a
model category structure on commutative algebras in SG (Proposition B.130). The
other is that the geometric fixed point functor (§B.10) preserves (acyclic) cofibra-
tions. The first requirement could be met by replacing “positive” with dim V > 0.
The second requires dim V G > 0, once one is using a positive model structure on
S.
2.2.7. Virtual representation spheres and RO(G)-graded cohomology. Using the spec-
tra S −V1 and the spaces S V0 one can associate a stable “sphere” to each virtual
representation V of G. To do so, one first represents V as difference [V0 ] − [V1 ] of
representations, and then sets
                                   S V = S −V1 ∧ S V0 .
If (V0 , V1 ) and (W0 , W1 ) are two pairs of orthogonal representations representing
the same virtual representation
                      V = [V0 ] − [V1 ] = [W0 ] − [W1 ] ∈ RO(G),
then there is a representation U , and an equivariant orthogonal isomorphism
                            W1 ⊕ V0 ⊕ U ≈ V1 ⊕ W0 ⊕ U.
A choice of such data gives weak equivalences
  S −W1 ∧ S W0 ← S −W1 ⊕V0 ⊕U ∧ S W0 ⊕V0 ⊕U
                                         ≈ S −V1 ⊕W0 ⊕U ∧ S W0 ⊕V0 ⊕U → S −V1 ∧ S V0
Thus, up to weak equivalence
                                   S V = S −V1 ∧ S V0
20                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


depends only on V . However, the weak equivalence between the spheres arising
from different choices depends on data not specified in the notation. This leads
to some subtleties in grading equivariant stable homotopy groups over the real
representation ring RO(G). See [5, §6] and [57, Chapter XIII]. The virtual repre-
sentation spheres arising in this paper always occur as explicit differences of actual
representations.
   In the positive complete model structure, the spectrum S −V1 ∧ S V0 will be cofi-
brant if and only if the dimension of the fixed point space V1G is positive.
Definition 2.24. Suppose that V is a virtual representation of G. A positive
representative of V consists of a pair of representations (V0 , V1 ) with dim V1G > 0
and for which
                             V = [V0 ] − [V1 ] ∈ RO(G).
   Associated to every subgroup H ⊂ G and every representation V ∈ RO(H) is
the group
                              πVH (X) = [S V , X]H .
An equivariant cohomology theory is associated to every equivariant orthogonal
spectrum E, by
                       E k (X) = [X, S k ∧ E]G
                       Ek (X) = [S k , E ∧ X]G = πkG (E ∧ X).
There is also an RO(G)-graded version, defined by
                      E V (X) = [X, S V ∧ E]G
                       EV (X) = [S V , E ∧ X]G = πVG (E ∧ X).
2.3. Multiplicative properties.
2.3.1. Commutative and associative algebras.
Definition 2.25. An equivariant commutative algebra (or just commutative al-
gebra) is a unital commutative monoid in SG with respect to the smash product
operation. An equivariant associative algebra (associative algebra) is a unital asso-
ciative monoid with respect to the smash product.
     There is a weaker “up to homotopy notion” that sometimes comes up.
Definition 2.26. An equivariant homotopy associative algebra (or just homotopy
associative algebra) is an associative algebra in ho SG . An equivariant homotopy
commutative algebra (or just homotopy commutative algebra) is a commutative al-
gebra in ho SG .
   The category of commutative algebras in SG and spaces of equivariant multiplica-
tive maps will be denoted CommG . The T G -enriched category of G-equivariant
commutative algebras and G-spaces of non-equivariant multiplicative maps will
be denoted CommG . The categories CommG and CommG are tensored and
cotensored over T and T G respectively. The tensor product of an equivariant com-
mutative algebra R and a G-space T will be denoted
                                       R⊗T
to distinguish it from the smash product. By definition
                   CommG (R ⊗ T, E) = T G (T, CommG (R, E)).
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 21


   We make CommG into a homotopical category by defining a map to be a weak
equivalence if the underlying map of orthogonal G-spectra is. The free commutative
algebra functor                             _
                            X 7→ Sym(X) =       Symn X,
                                                 n≥0
is left adjoint to the forgetful functor. It takes weak equivalences between cofibrant
spectra to weak equivalences (Proposition B.113). This is the key point in showing
that the forgetful functor
                                     CommG → SG
creates a (T -enriched) model category from the positive complete model structure
on SG (Proposition B.130), and that
                                   CommG → SG
                                               ¯
creates a T G -enriched model structure. For H ⊂ G the forgetful functor CommG →
CommH and its left adjoint form a Quillen morphism. A similar set of results ap-
plies to associative algebras.
    Modules over an equivariant commutative ring are defined in the evident way
using the smash product. The category of left modules over R and equivariant
maps will be denoted MR . A map of R-modules is defined to be a weak equivalence
if the underlying map of spectra is a weak equivalence. The adjoint “free module”
and “forgetful” functors
                        X 7→ R ∧ X : SG ⇆ MR : M 7→ M
create a model category structure on MR . It becomes an enriched symmetric
monoidal model category under the operation
                                       M ∧N
                                             R
where M is regarded as a right R-module via
                                      flip
                             M ∧ R −−→ R ∧ M → M,
and M ∧ N is defined by the coequalizer diagram
       R
                         M ∧ R ∧ N ⇒ M ∧ N → M ∧ N.
                                                       R
   There are also the related notions of E∞ and A∞ algebras. It can be shown that
the categories of E∞ and commutative algebras are Quillen equivalent, as are those
of A∞ and associative algebras.
2.3.2. Commutative algebras and indexed monoidal products. Because it is symmet-
ric monoidal, the functor N take commutative algebras to commutative algebras,
and so induces a functor
                              G
                         N = NH : CommH → CommG .
The following result is proved in the Appendices, as Corollaries A.56 and B.134.
Proposition 2.27. The functor
                             N : CommH → CommG .
is left adjoint to the restriction functor i∗ . Together they form a Quillen morphism
of model categories.                                                                
22                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Corollary 2.28. There is a natural isomorphism
                              G ∗
                             NH (iH R) → R ⊗ (G/H),
under which the counit of the adjunction is identified with the map
                              R ⊗ (G/H) → R ⊗ (pt)
given by the unique G-map G/H → pt.

  Proof: Since both R ⊗ (G/H) and the left adjoint to restriction corepresent the
same functor, this follows from Proposition 2.27                               
  A useful consequence Corollary 2.28 is that the group N (H)/H of G-automor-
                                   G ∗
phisms of G/H acts naturally on NH   (iH R). The result below is used in the main
computational assertion of Proposition 5.50.
Corollary 2.29. For γ ∈ N (H)/H the following diagram commutes:
                              G ∗             γ
                             NH (iH R)               / N G (i∗ R)
                                   ❁❁                    H H
                                     ❁❁                  ✂✂
                                       ❁❁             ✂✂✂
                                         ❁       ✂ ✂
                                              R

     Proof: Immediate from Corollary 2.28.                                      
   At this point a serious technical issue arises. The spectra underlying commuta-
tive rings are almost never cofibrant. This means that there is no guarantee that
the norm of a commutative ring has the correct homotopy type. The fact that it
does is one of the main results of Appendix B. The following is a consequence of
Proposition B.147.
Proposition 2.30. Suppose that R is a cofibrant commutative H-algebra, and
R̃ → R is a cofibrant approximation of the underlying H-spectrum. If Z̃ → Z is a
weak equivalence of G-spectra then
                              G              G
                             NH (R̃) ∧ Z̃ → NH (R) ∧ Z
is a weak equivalence.                                                          
  We refer to the property exhibited in Proposition 2.30 by saying that cofibrant
commutative rings are very flat.
2.3.3. Other uses of the norm. There are several important constructions derived
from the norm functor which also go by the name of “the norm.”
   Suppose that R is a G-equivariant commutative ring spectrum, and X is an
H-spectrum for a subgroup H ⊂ G. Write
                                0
                               RH (X) = [X, i∗H R]H .
There is a norm map
                            G    0        0   G
                          NH  : RH (X) → RG (NH X)
defined by sending an H-equivariant map X → R to the composite
                              G      G ∗
                             NH X → NH (iH R) → R,
in which the second map is the counit of the restriction-norm adjunction. This
is the norm map on equivariant spectrum cohomology, and is the form in which
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              23


the norm is described in Greenlees-May [27]. For an explicit comparison with [27]
see [11].
   When V is a representation of H and X = S V the above gives a map
                                  G
                             N = NH : πVH R → πind
                                               G
                                                   VR

in which ind V is the induced representation which we call the norm map on the
RO(G)-graded homotopy groups of commutative rings
   Now suppose that X is a pointed G-space. There is a norm map
                                G    0        0
                               NH : RH (X) → RG (X)
sending
                                 0
                            x ∈ RH (X) = [S 0 ∧ X, i∗H R]H
to the composite
              S 0 ∧ X → S 0 ∧ N (X) ≈ N (S 0 ∧ X) → N (i∗H R) → R,
in which the equivariant map of pointed G-spaces
                                           G
                                      X → NH (X)
is the “diagonal”
                                      Y             ^
                             X→            Xj →            Xj
                                  j∈G/H            j∈G/H

whose j th component is the inverse to the isomorphism
                               Xj = (Hj )+ ∧ X → X
                                               H

given by the action map. That this is actually equivariant is probably most easily
seen by making the identification
                                Xj ≈ homH (Hj−1 , X)
in which Hj−1 denotes the left H-coset consisting of the inverses of the elements of
Hj , and then writing
                              Y
                                  Xj ≈ homH (G, X).
                              j∈G/H

Under this identification, the “diagonal” map is the map
                                 X → homH (G, X)
adjoint to the action map
                                      G × X → X,
                                       H
which is clearly equivariant.
  One can combine these construction to define the norm on RO(G)-graded coho-
mology of a G-space X
                               G    V        ind V
                              NH : RH (X) → RG     (X)
sending
                                           a
                                       → S V ∧ i∗H R
                                S0 ∧ X −
to the composite
                                      Na
                     → S 0 ∧ N X −−→ S ind V ∧ N i∗H R → S ind V ∧ R.
              S0 ∧ X −
24                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


2.4. The method of twisted monoid rings. In this section we describe the
method of twisted monoid rings. The basic constructions are categorical, and in
§§2.4.1-2.4.2 we do not make any homotopy theoretic considerations. In §2.4.3 we
take up the homotopy theoretic aspects of our constructions.
2.4.1. Twisted monoid rings. We start with a subgroup H of G, and a positive
representative (V0 , V1 ) of a virtual representation V of H. Let
                                                _
                                   S 0 [S V ] =   (S V )∧k
                                                 k≥0

be the free H-equivariant associative algebra generated by S V = S −V1 ∧ S V0 , and
                                       x̄ ∈ πVH S 0 [S V ]
the homotopy class of the generating inclusion. When |x̄| = 0, the spectrum S 0 [S V ]
is the monoid ring of the free monoid on one generator, and is in fact commutative.
For general x̄ it is the Thom spectrum of an associative monoid map from the
free monoid on one generator to the classifying space for H-equivariant real vector
bundles, hence a twisted monoid ring. It is not typically a commutative algebra,
though the RO(H)-equivariant homotopy groups make it appear so, since π⋆H S 0 [S V ]
is a free module over π⋆H S 0 with basis {1, x̄, x̄2 , . . . }. It will be convenient to use
the notation
                                  S 0 [x̄] = S 0 [S V ].
    Using the norm functor we can form the G-equivariant twisted monoid ring
                              G
                             NH (S 0 [S V ]) = S 0 [G+ ∧ S V ].
                                                             H
This spectrum can also be described as a Thom spectrum over the free commutative
monoid generated by G/H. Things will look cleaner, and better resemble the
(polynomial) algebras we are modeling if we use the alternate notation
                                S 0 [G · S V ] and S 0 [G · x̄].
Though the symbol H is omitted in this notation, it is still referenced. The rep-
resentation V is representation of H, and x̄ is an H-equivariant map with domain
SV .
   By smashing examples like these together we can make associative algebras that
are twisted forms of free commutative monoid algebras over S 0 , in which the group
G is allowed to act on the monoid. More explicitly, suppose we are given a sequence
(possibly infinite) of subgroups Hi ⊂ G and for each i a positive representative
((Vi )0 , (Vi )1 ) of a virtual representation Vi of Hi . For each i form
                                          S 0 [G · x̄i ]
as described above, smash the first m together to make
                                 S 0 [G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄m ],
and then pass to the colimit to construct the G-equivariant associative algebra
                               T = S 0 [G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ].
   The twisted monoid ring T can also be described as a Thom spectrum over the
free commutative monoid generated by the G-set
                                     a∞
                                J=      G/Hi .
                                             i=1
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                25


By construction, it is an indexed smash product of an indexed wedge
                                           ∞
                                         ^ _
(2.31)                             T =              S nV (j)
                                         j∈J n=0

where for j = gHi , V (j) is the virtual representation of gHi g −1 with positive
representative
                                                                 
               V (j) = V (j)0 , V (j)1 = (gHi ) × (Vi )0 , (Vi )1
                                                           Hi

   All of this can be done relative to an equivariant commutative algebra R by
defining
                               R[G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ]
to be
                             R ∧ S 0 [G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ].
   Because they can fail to be commutative, these twisted monoid rings do not have
all of the algebraic properties one might hope for. But it is possible to naturally
construct all of the equivariant monomial ideals. Here is how.
   Applied to (2.31) the distributive law of §A.3.3 gives an isomorphism of T with
the indexed wedge
                                         _
                                   T =       S Vf
                                            f ∈NJ
                                                0

in which f is running through the set of functions
                               J → N0 = {0, 1, 2, . . . }
taking non-zero values on only finitely many elements (finitely supported functions).
The group G acts on the set NJ0 through its action on J, and Vf is the virtual
representation
                                      X
                                Vf =     f (j) · V (j)
                                         j∈J
of the stabilizer Hf of f , with the evident positive representation
                                                         
                              M        f (j)
                                             M      f (j)
                                 V (j)0 ,     V (j)1  .
                             j∈J               j∈J

  The G-set NJ0 is a commutative monoid under addition of functions, and the ring
structure on T is the indexed sum of the obvious isomorphisms
                           S Vf ∧ S Vg ≈ S Vf ⊕Vg ≈ S Vf +g .
   Recall (for example from [15]) that an ideal in a commutative monoid L is a
subset I ⊂ L with the property that L + I ⊂ I. Given a G-stable ideal I ⊂ NJ0
form the G-spectrum
                                       _
                                  TI =    S Vf .
                                             f ∈I
The formula for the multiplication in T implies that TI is an equivariant sub bi-
module of T , and that the association I 7→ TI is an inclusion preserving function
from the set of ideals in NJ0 to the set of sub-bimodules of T . For a more general
and systematic discussion see §A.3.6.
26                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Example 2.32. The monomial ideal corresponding to the set I of all non-zero ele-
ments of NJ0 is the augmentation ideal (up to homotopy it is the fiber of the map
T → S 0 ). It is convenient to denote this T bimodule as (G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ). More
generally, for an integer n > 0 the set nI = I + · · · + I of n-fold sums of elements of
I is a monoid ideal. It corresponds to the monomial ideal given by the nth power
of the augmentation ideal.
Example 2.33. Let dim : NJ0 → N0 be the function given by
                                         X
                       dim f = dim Vf =     f (j) dim Vj .
                                                    j∈J

If for all i, dim Vi > 0, then the set {f | dim f ≥ d} is a monoid ideal in NJ0
and corresponds to the monomial ideal M ⊂ T consisting the wedge of spheres of
dimension greater than d. The quotient bimodule Md /Md−1 can be identified with
the indexed coproduct
                                      _
                                          S Vf
                                         dim f =d

on which T is acting through the augmentation T → S 0 . These monomial ideals
play an important role in the proof of the Slice Theorem in §6.
2.4.2. The method of twisted monoid rings.
Definition 2.34. Suppose that
                               fi : Bi → R,         i = 1, . . . m
are algebra maps from associative algebra Bi to a commutative algebra R. The
smash product of the fi is the algebra map
                              m
                              ^          m
                                         ^          m
                                                    ^
                                  fi :       Bi →         R → R,
in which the right most map is the iterated multiplication. If B is an H-equivariant
associative algebra, and f : B → i∗H R is an algebra map, we define the norm of f
to be the G-equivariant algebra map
                                          G
                                         NH B→R
given by
                                G      G ∗
                               NH B → NH (iH R) → R,
in which the rightmost map is the counit of the adjunction described in Proposi-
tion 2.27.
   These constructions make it easy to map a twisted monoid ring to a commutative
algebra. Suppose that R is a fibrant G-equivariant commutative algebra, and we’re
given a sequence
                           x̄i ∈ πVHii R,  i = 1, 2, . . . .
A choice of positive representative ((V0 )i , (V1 )i ) of Vi and a map
                                          S Vi → R
representing x̄i determines an associative algebra map
                                         S 0 [x̄i ] → R.
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                       27


Applying the norm gives a G-equivariant associative algebra map
                                       S 0 [G · x̄i ] → R.
By smashing these together we can make a sequence of equivariant algebra maps
                               S 0 [G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄m ] → R.
Passing to the colimit gives an equivariant algebra map
(2.35)                          S 0 [G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ] → R
representing the sequence x̄i . We will refer to this process by saying that the
map (2.35) is constructed by the method of twisted monoid rings. The whole con-
struction can also be made relative to a commutative algebra S, leading to an
S-algebra map
(2.36)                          S[G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ] → R
when R is a commutative S-algebra.

2.4.3. Quotient modules. One important construction in ordinary stable homotopy
theory is the formation of the quotient of a module M over a commutative algebra
R by the ideal generated by a sequence {x1 , x2 , . . . } ⊂ π∗ R. This is done by
inductively forming the cofibration sequence of R-modules
(2.37)       Σ|xn | M/(x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) → M/(x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) → M/(x1 , . . . , xn )
and passing to the homotopy colimit in the end. There is an evident equivalence
                            M/(x1 , . . . ) ≈ M ∧ R/(x1 , . . . )
                                                     R

in case M is a cofibrant R-module. The situation is slightly trickier in equivariant
stable homotopy theory, where the group G might act on the elements xi , and
prevent the inductive approach described above. The method of twisted monoid
rings (§2.4.1) can be used to get around this difficulty.
   Suppose that R is a fibrant equivariant commutative algebra, and that
                              x̄i ∈ πVHii (R)         i = 1, 2, . . .
is a sequence of equivariant homotopy classes. Using the method of twisted monoid
rings, construct an associative R-algebra map
(2.38)                       T = R[G · x̄1 , G · x̄2 , . . . ] → R.
Using this map, we may regard an equivariant R-module M as a T -module. In
addition to (2.38) we will make use of the augmentation ǫ : T → R sending the x̄i
to zero.
Definition 2.39. The quotient module M/(G · x̄1 , . . . ) is the R-module
                                                 L
                                             M ∧R
                                                 T

in which T acts on M through the map (2.38) and on R through the augmentation.
                L
  The symbol ∧ denotes derived smash product. By Proposition B.139 it can be
computed by taking a cofibrant approximation in either variable.
28                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Let us check that this construction reduces to the usual one when the group
acting is the trivial group and M is a cofibrant R-module. For ease of notation,
write
                                      T = R[x1 , . . . ]
                                     Tn = R[x1 , . . . , xn ].
Using the isomorphism
                       R[x1 , . . . ] ≈ R[x1 , . . . , xn ] ∧ R[xn+1 , . . . ]
                                                           R

one can construct an associative algebra map
                                      T → R[xn+1 , . . . ]
by smashing the augmentation
                                     R[x1 , . . . , xn ] → R
sending each xi to 0, with the identity map of R[xn+1 , . . . ]. By construction, the
evident map of T -algebras
                              lim R[xn+1 , . . . ] → R
                              −→
is an isomorphism, and hence so is the map
                             lim M ∧ R[xn+1 , . . . ] → M ∧ R.
                             −→    T                      T

   In fact this isomorphism is also a derived equivalence. To see this construct a
sequence
                             → · · · Nn+1 → Nn+2 · · ·
of cofibrations of cofibrant left T -module approximations to
                       → · · · R[xn+1 , . . . ] → R[xn+2 , . . . ] → · · · .
We have
                 π∗ lim Nk ≈ lim π∗ Nk ≈ lim(π∗ R)[xk , . . . ] ≈ R
                    −→       −→          −→
from which one concludes that the map
                              lim Nk → lim R[xk , . . . ]
                              −→         −→
is a cofibrant approximation. It follows that
                       M/(x1 , . . . ) ≈ holim M/(x1 , . . . , xn ).
                                           −→
   To compare M/(x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) with M/(x1 , . . . , xn ) let Tn → R[xn ] be associative
algebra map constructed from the isomorphism
                                     Tn ≈ Tn−1 ∧ R[xn ].
                                                    R

by smashing the augmentation of Tn−1 with the identity map of R[xn ]. We have
          M/(x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) ∼ M ∧ R ≈ M ∧ Tn ∧ R ≈ M ∧ R[xn ].
                                       Tn−1             Tn       Tn−1            Tn

By Proposition B.139 M ∧ R[xn ] is a cofibrant R[xn ]-module. The cofibration
                              Tn
sequence (2.37) is now constructed by applying the functor
(2.40)                         M/(x1 , . . . , xn−1 ) ∧ ( − ).
                                                        R[xn ]
                                     KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                           29


to the pushout diagram of R[xn ] bimodules
(2.41)                                     (xn )        / R[xn ]


                                                            
                                             ∗             /R
and appealing to Corollary B.140.
  A similar discussion applies to the equivariant situation, giving
                         M/(G · x̄1 , . . . ) ≈ lim M/(G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄n ),
                                                −→
a relation
              M/(G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄n ) ≈ M/(G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄n−1 )       ∧        R,
                                                                                   R[G·x̄n ]

and a cofibration sequence
(G· x̄n )·M/(G· x̄1 , . . . , G· x̄n−1 ) → M/(G· x̄1 , . . . , G· x̄n−1 ) → M/(G· x̄1 , . . . , G· x̄n ),
derived by applying the functor
                              M/(G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄n−1 )       ∧       (−)
                                                                 R[G·x̄n ]

to
                              (G · x̄n ) → R[G · x̄n ] → R.
     One can also easily deduce the equivalences
(2.42)            R/(G · x̄1 , . . . , G · x̄n ) ≈ R/(G · x̄1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ R/(G · x̄1 )
                                                                     R       R

and
(2.43)              R/(G · x̄1 , . . . ) ≈ lim R/(G · x̄1 ) ∧ · · · ∧ R/(G · x̄n ).
                                           −→               R       R
These expressions play an important role in the proof Lemma 7.7, which is a key
step in the proof the Reduction Theorem.
2.5. Fixed points, isotropy separation and geometric fixed points.
2.5.1. Fixed point spectra. The fixed point spectrum of a G-spectrum X is defined
to be the spectrum of G fixed points in the underlying, non-equivariant spectrum
i∗0 X. In other words it is given by
                                             X 7→ (i∗0 X)G .
The notation i∗0 X G can get clumsy and we will usually abbreviate it to X G .
   The functor of fixed points has a left adjoint which sends S −V ∧ XV ∈ S to
  −V
S    ∧ XV ∈ SG , where in the latter expression V is regarded as a representation
of G with trivial G-action and XV is regarded as a space with trivial G-action. It
can be computed for general X in terms of the tautological presentation
                 _                              _
                    J (V, W )+ ∧ S −W ∧ XV ⇒       S −V ∧ XV → X
                   V,W                                           V

for the trivial group (see (A.15)), once one observes that
                                      J (V, W ) = JG (V, W )
when V and W have trivial G-action.
30                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Under the equivalence between SG and the category of objects in S equipped with
a G-action, the fixed point spectrum functor is formed by passing to objectwise fixed
points, and its left adjoint is given by regarding a non-equivariant spectrum as a
G-object with trivial G-action.
   The fixed point functor and its left adjoint form a Quillen morphism in the
positive complete model structures. Neither the fixed point functor nor its left
adjoint is homotopical and so both need to be derived. As one can easily check
from the definition, if X is fibrant (or more generally has the property that for some
exhausting sequence {Vn }, the map XVn → ΩVn+1 −Vn XVn+1 is a weak equivalence)
there is an isomorphism
                                  π∗ (X G ) ≈ π∗G X.
   The (derived) fixed point functor on spectra doesn’t always have the properties
one might be led to expect by analogy with spaces. For example even though
the composition of the fixed point functor with its left adjoint is the identity, the
composition of the derived functors is not. The derived fixed point functor does
not generally commute with smash products, or with the formation of suspension
spectra.

2.5.2. Isotropy separation and geometric fixed points. A standard approach to get-
ting at the equivariant homotopy type of a G-spectrum X is to nest X between
two pieces, one an aggregate of information about the spectra i∗H X for all proper
subgroups H ⊂ G, and the other a localization of X at a “purely G” part. This is
the isotropy separation sequence of X.
   More formally, let P denote the family of proper subgroups of G, and EP the
“classifying space” for P, characterized up to equivariant weak equivalence by the
property that the space of fixed points EP G is empty, while for any proper H ⊂ G,
EP H is weakly contractible. For convenience we will assume that EP has been
chosen to be a G-CW complex. Such a model can be constructed as the join of
infinitely many copies of G/H with H ranging through the proper subgroups of G.
It can also be constructed as the unit sphere in the sum of infinitely many copies
of the reduced regular representation of G. Any G-CW complex EP admits an
                                                                  n
equivariant cell decomposition into cells of the form (G/H)+ ∧ D+   with H a proper
subgroup of G.
   Let ẼP be the mapping cone of EP → pt, with the cone point taken as base
point. The G-CW complex ẼP is characterized up to equivariant homotopy equiv-
alence by the property
                                         (
                                   H      S0 H = G
                               ẼP    ∼
                                           ∗    H 6= G.
The important isotropy separation sequence is constructed by smashing a G spec-
trum X with the defining cofibration sequence for ẼP
(2.44)                      EP+ ∧ X → X → ẼP ∧ X.
The term on the left can be described in terms of the action of proper subgroups
H ⊂ G on X. The homotopy type of the term on the right is determined by its
right derived fixed point spectrum
                                                 G
                             ΦG (X) = (ẼP ∧ X)f ,
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               31


in which the subscript f indicates a functorial fibrant replacement. The functor
ΦG (X) is the geometric fixed point functor and has many remarkable properties.
Proposition 2.45.      i) The functor ΦG sends weak equivalences to weak equiva-
lences.
 ii) The functor ΦG commutes with filtered homotopy colimits.
iii) For a G-space A and a representation V of G there is a weak equivalence
                    G
ΦG (S −V ∧ A) ≈ S −V ∧ AG where V G ⊂ V is the subspace of G-invariant vectors.
iv) For G-spectra X and Y the spectra
                       ΦG (X ∧ Y )    and   ΦG (X) ∧ ΦG (Y ).
are related by a natural chain of weak equivalences.
Remark 2.46. Note that in terms of the canonical homotopy presentation
                               X ≈ holim S −V ∧ XV
                                     −→
                                        V

properties i)-iii) of Proposition 2.45 imply that
                                                G
(2.47)                      ΦG X ≈ holim S −V       ∧ XVG .
                                     −→
                                        V



   Sketch of proof: The first assertion follows from the fact that smashing with ẼP
is homotopical (§B.3.7), so need not be derived, and that the fixed point functor is
homotopical on the full subcategory of fibrant objects. The second is straightfor-
ward. Part iii) is Corollary B.185. By the remark above, the canonical homotopy
presentation reduces part iv) to the case X = S −V ∧ A, Y = S −W ∧ B, with A and
B G-CW complexes. One easily checks the assertion in this case using part iii). 

Remark 2.48. When G = C2n , the space EP is the space EC2 with G acting
through the epimorphism G → C2 . Taking S ∞ with the antipodal action as a
model of EC2 , this leads to an identification
                                  ẼP ≈ lim S nσ ,
                                         n→∞
           nσ
in which S denotes the one point compactification of the direct sum of n copies
of the real sign representation of G.
Remark 2.49. The isotropy separation sequence often leads to the situation of need-
ing to show that a map X → Y of cofibrant G-spectra induces a weak equivalence
                                ẼP ∧ X → ẼP ∧ Y.
Since for every proper H ⊂ G, π∗H ẼP ∧ X = π∗H ẼP ∧ Y = 0, this is equivalent
to showing that the map of geometric fixed point spectra ΦG X → ΦG Y is a weak
equivalence.
Remark 2.50. Since for every proper H ⊂ G, π∗H ẼP ∧ X = 0, it is also true that
                                 [T, ẼP ∧ X]G
                                             ∗ = 0
32                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


for every G-CW spectrum T built entirely from G-cells of the form G+ ∧ Dn with
                                                                          H
H a proper subgroup of G. Similarly, if T is gotten from T0 by attaching G-cells
induced from proper subgroups, then the restriction map
                              [T, ẼP ∧ X]G                 G
                                          ∗ → [T0 , ẼP ∧ X]∗
is an isomorphism. This holds, for example, if T is the suspension spectrum of a
G-CW complex, and T0 ⊂ T is the subcomplex of G-fixed points.
Remark 2.51. For a subgroup H ⊂ G and a G-spectrum X, it will be convenient
to use the abbreviation
                                        ΦH X
for the more correct ΦH i∗H X. This situation comes up in our proof of the “homotopy
fixed point” property of Theorem 10.8, where the more compound notation becomes
a little unwieldy.
   We end this section with a simple result whose proof illustrates a typical use of
the geometric fixed point spectra.
Proposition 2.52. Suppose that X is a G-spectrum with the property that for
all H ⊂ G, the geometric fixed point spectrum ΦH X is contractible. Then X is
contractible as a G-spectrum.

    Proof: By induction on |G| we may assume that for proper H ⊂ G, the spectrum
i∗H X is contractible. Since both G+ ∧ ( − ) and the formation of mapping cones
                                             H
are homotopical it follows that T ∧ X is contractible for any G-CW complex built
entirely from cells of the form G+ ∧ Dn with H ⊂ G proper. This applies in
                                         H
particular to T = EP+ . The isotropy separation sequence then shows that
                                       X → ẼP ∧ X
is a weak equivalence. But Remark 2.49 and our assumption that ΦG X is con-
tractible imply that ẼP ∧ X is contractible.                            

2.5.3. Monoidal geometric fixed points. For some purposes it is useful to have a
version of the geometric fixed point functor which is lax symmetric monoidal. For
example, such a functor automatically takes (commutative) algebras to (commu-
tative) algebras. The geometric fixed point functor defined in [53, §V.4] has this
property. We denote it ΦG   M and refer to it as the monoidal geometric fixed point
functor in order to distinguish it from ΦG . The following is a compendium of results
from [53, §V.4]. The construction and proofs are described in §B.10.
Proposition 2.53. The monoidal geometric fixed point functor has the following
properties:
     i) It preserves acyclic cofibrations.
 ii) It is lax symmetric monoidal.
iii) If X and Y are cofibrant, the map
                             ΦG        G         G
                              M (X) ∧ ΦM (Y ) → ΦM (X ∧ Y )
is an isomorphism.
iv) It commutes with cobase change along a closed inclusion.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                33


 v) It commutes with directed colimits.

   Property iii) implies that ΦG
                               M is weakly symmetric monoidal in the sense of the
definition below.

Definition 2.54 (Schwede-Shipley [75]). A functor F : C → D between (symmet-
ric) monoidal model categories is weakly (symmetric) monoidal if it is lax (symmet-
ric) monoidal, and the map

                            F (X) ∧ F (Y ) → F (X ∧ Y )

is a weak equivalence when X and Y are cofibrant.

  The next result is [53, Proposition V.4.17], and is discussed in more detail as
Proposition B.201.

Proposition 2.55. The left derived functor of ΦG     G
                                               M is Φ . More specifically, there
are natural transformations
                                               ∼
                           ΦG (X) → Φ̃G     − ΦG
                                      M (X) ←  M (X)

in which the rightmost arrow is a always weak equivalence and the leftmost arrow
is a weak equivalence when X is cofibrant.                                     

  Because ΦG is lax monoidal, it determines functors
                                    G
                            ΦG
                             M : Alg → Alg
                                     G
                            ΦG
                             M : Comm → Comm,

and for each associative algebra R a functor

                               ΦG
                                M : MR → MΦG
                                           MR
                                              .

In addition, if R is an associative algebra, M a right R-module and N a left R-
module there is a natural map

(2.56)                  ΦG             G      G
                         M (M ∧ N ) → ΦM M ∧ ΦM N.
                                R               ΦG
                                                 MR


The argument for [53, Proposition V.4.7] shows that (2.56) is a weak equivalence
(in fact an isomorphism) if M and N are cofibrant and R is “cellular.” See Propo-
sition B.203. (Recently, Blumberg and Mandell [10, Appendix A] have shown that
one need only require one of M or N to be cofibrant in order to guarantee that this
map is an isomorphism.)
   While these properties if ΦGM are very convenient, they must be used with cau-
tion. The value ΦGM (X)  is only guaranteed to have the “correct” homotopy type on
cofibrant objects. The spectrum underlying a commutative algebra is rarely known
to be cofibrant, making the monoidal geometric fixed point functor difficult to use
in that context. The situation is a little better with associative algebras. The weak
equivalence (2.56) leads to an expression for the geometric fixed point spectrum of
a quotient module which we will use in §7.3. In order to do so, we need criteria
guaranteeing that the monoidal geometric fixed point functor realizes the correct
homotopy type. Such criteria are described in §B.10.4.
34                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


2.5.4. Geometric fixed points and the norm. The geometric fixed point construction
interacts well with the norm. Suppose H ⊂ G is a subgroup, and that X is an H-
spectrum. The following result is proved as Proposition B.209. Our original version
merely concluded that the transformation in question was a weak equivalence on
cofibrant objects. Andrew Blumberg and Mike Mandell pointed out that it is in
fact an isomorphism on cofibrant objects, and at their request we have included a
proof of the stronger statement.
Proposition 2.57. There is a natural map
                                ΦH      G   G
                                 M X → ΦM (NH X)

which is an isomorphism, hence a weak equivalence, on cofibrant objects.
   Because of Proposition 2.55 and the fact that the norm preserves cofibrant ob-
jects (Proposition B.89), the above result gives a natural zig-zag of weak equiv-
alences relating ΦH (X) and ΦG (NH G
                                     X) when X is cofibrant. In fact there is a
natural zig-zag of maps
                               ΦH X ↔ ΦG (NH  G
                                                X)
which is a weak equivalence not only for cofibrant X, but for suspension spectra
of cofibrant G-spaces and for the spectra underlying cofibrant commutative rings.
The actual statement is somewhat technical, and is one of the main results of
Appendix B. The condition is described in the statement of Proposition B.213. See
also Remarks B.215 and B.216.
Corollary 2.58. For the spectra satisfying the condition of Proposition B.213, the
composite functor
                              ΦG ◦ N HG
                                         : SH → S
preserves, up to weak equivalence, wedges, directed colimits along closed inclusions
and cofiber sequences.


     Proof: The properties obviously hold for ΦH .                                
  There is another useful result describing the interaction of the geometric fixed
point functor with the norm map in RO(G)-graded cohomology described in §2.3.3.
Suppose that R is a G-equivariant commutative algebra, X is a G-space, and V ∈
RO(H) a virtual real representation of a subgroup H ⊂ G. In this situation one
can compose the norm
                                  V          ind V
                            N : RH  (X) → RG       (X)
with the geometric fixed point map
                                                     H
                          ΦG : RG
                                ind V
                                      (X) → (ΦG R)V (X G ),
where V H ⊂ V is the subspace of H-fixed vectors, and X G is the space of G-fixed
points in X.
Proposition 2.59. The composite
                                                     H
                         ΦG ◦ N : RH
                                   V
                                     (X) → (ΦG R)V (X G )
is a ring homomorphism.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               35


   Proof: Multiplicativity is a consequence of the fact that both the norm and the
geometric fixed point functors are weakly monoidal. Additivity follows from the
fact that the composition ΦG ◦ N preserves wedges (Corollary 2.58).             

              3. Mackey functors, homology and homotopy
3.1. Mackey functors. In equivariant homotopy theory, the role of “abelian group”
is played by the notion of a Mackey functor (Dress [18]). The following is the sum-
mary of Dress’ definition as it appears in Greenlees-May [26].
Definition 3.1 (Dress [18]). A Mackey functor consists of a pair M = (M∗ , M ∗ ) of
functors from the category of finite G-sets to the category of abelian groups. The
two functors have the same object function (denoted M ) and take disjoint unions to
direct sums. The functor M∗ is covariant, while M ∗ is contravariant, and together
they take a pullback diagram of finite G-sets
                                              δ    /A
                                          S
                                      γ              α
                                                    
                                      T            /B
                                              β

to a commutative square
                                              δ∗
                                M (P )             / M (X)
                                   O                    O
                                 γ∗                      α∗

                                M (Y )             / M (Z)
                                              β∗

where α∗ = M ∗ (α), β∗ = M∗ (β), etc.
   The contravariant maps M ∗ (α) are called the restriction maps, and the covariant
maps M∗ (β), the transfer maps.
   A Mackey functor can also be defined as a contravariant additive functor from
the full subcategory of SG consisting of the suspension spectra Σ∞ B+ of finite G-
sets B. It is a theorem of tom Dieck that these definitions are equivalent. See [26,
§5].
   The equivariant homotopy groups of a G-spectrum X are naturally part of the
Mackey functor π n X defined by
                           (π n X)∗ (B) = [S n ∧ B+ , X]G
                           (π n X)∗ (B) = [S n , X ∧ B+ ]G .
The identification of the two object functors
                          [S n ∧ B+ , X]G ≈ [S n , X ∧ B+ ]G
comes from the self-duality of finite G-sets (Example 2.6). For B = G/H one has
                                 π n X(B) = πnH X.
  The Mackey functor π 0 S 0 is the Burnside ring Mackey functor A. It is the free
Mackey functor on one generator. For a G-set B, the value A(B) is the group
completion of the monoid of isomorphism classes of finite G-sets T → B over B
under disjoint union. The restriction maps are given by pullback, and the transfer
36                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


maps by composition. The group A(G/H) works out to be isomorphic to the abelian
group underlying the Burnside ring of finite H-sets.
   Just as every abelian group can occur as a stable homotopy group, every Mackey
functor M can occur as an equivariant stable homotopy group. In fact associated
to each Mackey functor M is an equivariant Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectrum HM ,
characterized by the property
                                       (
                                         M       n=0
                             π n HM =
                                         0       n 6= 0.
See [26, §5] or [47].
  The homology and cohomology groups of a G-spectrum X with coefficients in
M are defined by
                            HkG (X; M ) = πkG HM ∧ X
                             k
                            HG (X; M ) = [X, Σk HM ]G .
For a pointed G-space Y one defines
                            HnG (Y ; M ) = HnG (Σ∞ Y ; M )
                             n
                            HG             n
                               (Y ; M ) = HG (Σ∞ Y ; M ).
We emphasize that the equivariant (co)homology groups of pointed G-spaces Y we
consider will always be reduced (co)homology groups.
  We will have need to consider the ordinary, non-equivariant homology and co-
homology groups of the spectrum i∗0 X underlying a G-spectrum X. It will be
convenient to employ the shorthand notation
                              Hnu (X; Z) = Hn (i∗0 X; Z)
                              Hun (X; Z) = H n (i∗0 X; Z)
for these groups.

3.2. Constant and permutation Mackey functors. The constant Mackey func-
tor Z is the functor represented on the category of finite G-sets by the abelian group
Z with trivial G-action. The value of Z on a finite G-set B is the group of functions
                       Z(B) = homG (B, Z) = hom(B/G, Z).
The restriction maps are given by precomposition, and the transfer maps by sum-
ming over the fibers. For K ⊂ H ⊂ G, the transfer map associated by Z to
                                   G/K → G/H
is the map Z → Z given by multiplication by the index of K in H.
Definition 3.2. Suppose that S is a G-set, and write Z{S} for the free abelian
group generated by S, and ZS for the ring of functions S to Z. The permutation
Mackey functor Z{S} is the Mackey functor
                            Z{S}(B) = homG (B, Z{S}),
whose restriction maps are given by precomposition and transfer maps by summing
over the fibers.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 37


   The permutation Mackey functor Z{S} is naturally isomorphic to the Mackey
functor π 0 HZ ∧ S+ . To see this note that restricting to underlying non-equivariant
spectra gives a map
               π 0 HZ ∧ S+ (B) = [B+ , HZ ∧ S+ ]G → [B+ , HZ ∧ S+ ],
whose image lies in the G-invariant part. Since
                          [B+ , HZ ∧ S+ ] = hom(B, Z{S})
this gives a natural transformation
                               π 0 HZ ∧ S+ → Z{S}.
Since both sides take filtered colimits in S to filtered colimits, to check that it is
an isomorphism, it suffices to do so when S is finite. In that case we can use the
self duality of finite G-sets to compute
                        [B+ , HZ ∧ S+ ]G ≈ [B+ ∧ S+ , HZ]G ,
and then observe that by definition of the constant Mackey functor Z, the forgetful
map
                       [B+ ∧ S+ , HZ]G → [B+ ∧ S+ , HZ]
is an isomorphism with the G-invariant part of the target. The claim then follows
from the compatibility of equivariant Spanier-Whitehead duality with the restric-
tion functor to non-equivariant spectra.
   The properties of permutation Mackey functors listed in the Lemma below follow
immediately from the definition. They are used in §4.6.2 to establish some of our
basic tools for investigating the slice tower. To formulate part ii), note that every
G-set B receives a functorial map from a free G-set, namely G × B, and the group
of equivariant automorphisms of G × B over B is canonically isomorphic to G. For
instance, one can give G × B the product of the left action on G and the trivial
action on B, and take the map G× B → B to be the original action mapping. With
this choice the automorphisms G × B over B are of the form (g, b) 7→ (g x, x−1 b)
with x ∈ G.
Lemma 3.3. Let M be a permutation Mackey functor and B finite G-set.
  i) If B ′ → B is a surjective map of finite G-sets, then
                          M (B) → M (B ′ ) ⇒ M (B ′ × B ′ )
                                                     B

is an equalizer.
 ii) Restriction along the action map G × B → B gives an isomorphism
                               M (B) → M (G × B)G .
iii) The restriction mapping M (G/H) → M (G) gives an isomorphism
                                M (G/H) → M (G)H
of M (G/H) with the H-invariant part of M (G).
 iv) A map M → M ′ of permutation Mackey functors is an isomorphism if and
only if M (G) → M ′ (G) is an isomorphism.
                                                                         
38                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


3.3. Equivariant cellular chains and cochains. The Mackey functor homology
and cohomology groups of a G-CW spectrum X can be computed from a chain
complex analogous to the complex of cellular chains (see, for example [26, §5]).
Write X (n) for the n-skeleton of X so that
                               X (n) /X (n−1) ≈ Xn+ ∧ S n
with Xn a discrete G-set. Set
              Cncell (X; M ) = πnG HM ∧ X (n) /X (n−1) = π0G HM ∧ Xn +
               n
              Ccell (X; M ) = [X (n) /X (n−1) , Σn HM ]G = [Σ∞ Xn + , HM ]G .
The map
                           X (n) /X (n−1) → ΣX (n−1) /X (n−2)
defines boundary and coboundary maps
                              Cncell (X; M ) → Cn−1
                                                cell
                                                     (X; M )
                               n−1             n
                              Ccell (X; M ) → Ccell (X; M ).
The equivariant homology and cohomology groups of X with coefficients in M are
the homology and cohomology groups of these complexes. By writing the G-set Xn
as a coproduct of finite G-sets Xnα one can express Cncell (X; M ) and Ccell
                                                                        n
                                                                             (X; M ) in
                                                         α
terms of the values of the Mackey functor M on the Xn .
Example 3.4. Write ρG for the (real) regular representation of G and ρG − 1 for the
reduced regular representation. The groups
                                     H ∗ (S ρG −1 ; M )
play an important role in equivariant stable homotopy theory. To describe them
we need an equivariant cell decomposition of S ρG −1 . Since S ρG −1 is the mapping
cone of the map
                                S(ρG − 1) → pt
from the unit sphere in (ρG − 1) it suffices to construct an equivariant cell decom-
position of S(ρG − 1). Write g = |G|. Think of RG as the vector space with basis
the elements of G. The boundary of the standard simplex in this space is equiv-
ariantly homeomorphic to S(ρG − 1). The simplicial decomposition of this simplex
is not an equivariant cell decomposition, but the barycentric subdivision is. Thus
S(ρG − 1) is homeomorphic to the geometric realization of the poset of non-empty
proper subsets of G. This leads to the complex
(3.5)              M (G/G) → M (S0 ) → M (S1 ) → · · · → M (Sg−1 )
in which Sk is the G-set of flags F0 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Fk ⊂ G of proper inclusions of subsets
of G, with G acting by translation. The coboundary map is the alternating sum of
the restriction maps derived by omitting one of the sets in a flag.
Corollary 3.6. For any Mackey functor M , the group
                              πρGG −1 HM = HG
                                            0
                                              (S ρG −1 ; M )
is given by
                             \                         
                                  ker M (G/G) → M (G/H) .
                            H(G
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  39


   Proof: Using the complex (3.5) it suffices to show that the orbit types occurring
in S0 are precisely the transitive G-sets of the form G/H with H a proper subgroup
of G. The set S0 is the set of non-empty proper subsets S ⊂ G. Any proper
subgroup H of G occurs as the stabilizer of itself, regarded as a subset of G. Since
the subsets are proper, the group G does not occur as a stabilizer.               

Example 3.7. Let X be the sphere S d−1 with the action of C2n given by the antipo-
dal map, and pointed by adding a disjoint base point. The usual cell decomposition
into hemispheres is equivariant for the action of C2n , and for this cell structure one
has X (j) /X (j−1) = (C2n /C2n−1 )+ ∧ S j . The complex of cellular chains C∗cell (X; M )
works out to be the complex of length d
                                       1+γ             1−γ
                   M (C2n ) −−−→ · · · −−−→ M (C2n ) −−−→ M (C2n )
in which γ ∈ C2n is the generator.
Example 3.8. Let G = C2n and σ the sign representation of G. Suspending the
cell decomposition of Example 3.7 gives an equivariant cell decomposition of S dσ
whose k-skeleton is S kσ and whose set of k-cells is C2 + × Dk , in which G acts on
C2 through the unique surjective map G → C2 . The complex of cellular chains
C∗cell (S dσ ; M ) works out to be the complex of length (d + 1)
                                        1−γ
                      M (C2 ) −−−→ · · · −−−→ M (C2 ) −−−→ M (pt)
in which γ ∈ G is the preferred generator.
   If M is the constant Mackey functor Z, then Cncell (X; M ) is the permutation
Mackey functor Z{Xn }, and associates to a finite G-set B the group of equivariant
functions
                            B → Z{Xn } = Cncell X.
In this way the entire Mackey functor chain complex C∗cell (X; Z) is encoded in the
ordinary cellular chain complex C∗cell (X) for i∗0 X, equipped with the action of G.
The equivariant homology group H∗G (X; Z) are just the homology groups of the
complex
                        homG (G/G, C∗cell (X)) = C∗cell (X)G
                                                                             ∗
of G-invariant cellular chains. Similarly the equivariant cohomology groups HG (X; Z)
are given by the cohomology groups of the complex
                                        ∗
                                       Ccell (X)G
of equivariant cochains. The equivariant homology and cohomology groups depend
only on the equivariant chain homotopy type of these complexes of permutation
Mackey functors.
Example 3.9. If X is a G-space admitting the structure of a G-CW complex, then
                         ∗
the cohomology groups HG   (X; Z) are isomorphic to the cohomology groups
                                     H ∗ (X/G; Z)
of the orbit space. Indeed the equivariant cell decomposition of X induces a cell
decomposition of X/G and one has an isomorphism
                                ∗            ∗
                               Ccell (X)G ≈ Ccell (X/G).
40                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Example 3.10. Suppose that V is a representation of G of dimension d, and consider
the equivariant cellular chain complex
                                    cell
                Cdcell (S V ; Z) → Cd−1  (S V ; Z) → · · · → C0cell (S V ; Z),
associated to an equivariant cell decomposition of S V . The underlying homology
groups are those of the sphere S V . In particular, the kernel of
                             Cdcell (S V ; Z) → Cd−1
                                                 cell
                                                      (S V ; Z)
is isomorphic, as a G-module, to Hdu (S V ; Z). If V is orientable then the G-action
is trivial, and one finds that the restriction map
                               HdG (S V ; Z) → Hdu (S V ; Z)
is an isomorphism. A choice of orientation gives an equivariant isomorphism
                                     Hdu (S V ; Z) ≈ Z.
Thus when V is oriented there is a unique isomorphism
                                     HdG (S V ; Z) ≈ Z
extending the non-equivariant isomorphism given by the orientation.
3.4. Homology and geometric fixed points. In addition to the Mackey functor
homotopy groups π ∗ X there are the RO(G) graded homotopy groups π⋆G X defined
by
                       πVG X = [S V , X]G  V ∈ RO(G).
Here RO(G) is the Grothendieck group of real representations of G. The use of
⋆ for the wildcard symbol in π⋆G is taken from Hu-Kriz [35]. The RO(G)-graded
homotopy groups are also part of a Mackey functor π ⋆ (X) defined by
                              π V X(B) = [S V ∧ B+ , X]G .
As with Z-graded homotopy groups, we’ll use the abbreviation
                                 πVH X = (π V X)(G/H).
In this section we will make use of RO(G)-graded homotopy groups to describe the
geometric fixed point spectrum ΦG HZ when G = C2n (Proposition 3.18 below).
   There are a few distinguished elements of RO(G)-graded homotopy groups we
will need. Let V be a representation of G and S 0 → S V the one point compactifi-
cation of the inclusion {0} ⊂ V .
Definition 3.11. The element
                                             G
                                       aV ∈ π−V S0
                                                               G
is the element corresponding under the suspension isomorphism π−V S 0 ≈ π0G S V
             0      V
to the map S ֒→ S described above.
  The element aV is the Euler class of V in RO(G)-graded equivariant stable coho-
motopy. If V contains a trivial representation then aV = 0. For two representations
V and W one has
                                                G      0
                           aV ⊕W = aV aW ∈ π−V    −W S .
  When V is oriented, Example 3.10 provides a preferred generator of HdG (S V ; Z).
We give the corresponding RO(G)-graded homotopy class name.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                41


Definition 3.12. Let V be an oriented representation of G of dimension d. The
element
                                          G
                                  uV ∈ πd−V   HZ.
is the element corresponding to the preferred generator of πd HZ∧S V = HdG (S V ; Z)
given by Example 3.10.
  If V is trivial then uV = 1. If V and W are two oriented representations of G,
and V ⊕ W is given the direct sum orientation, then
                                    uV ⊕W = uV uW .
Among other things this implies that the class uV is stable in V in the sense that
uV +1 = uV .
   For any V , the representation V ⊕ V has a canonical orientation, giving
                                           G
                                  uV ⊕V ∈ π2d−2V HZ.
When V is oriented this class can be identified, up to sign, with u2V .
   The elements aV and uV behave well with respect to the norm. The following
result is a simple consequence of the fact (2.11) that N S V = S ind V .
Lemma 3.13. Suppose that V is a d-dimensional representation of a subgroup
H ⊂ G. Then
                                         N aV = aind V
                                  uind d · N uV = uind V ,
where ind V = indG
                 H V is the induced representation and d is the trivial representa-
tion.                                                                            
Remark 3.14. As is standard in algebra, we will adopt the convention that the
operation of mutiplication by an element of a ring on a module is denoted by the
element of the ring. We will also use it in closely related contexts. For example,
for a G-spectrum X we will refer to the to the maps
                          aV ∧ 1X : S −V ∧ X → X
                          uV ∧ 1X : S d−V ∧ X → HZ ∧ X
as multiplication by aV and uV respectively, and, when no confusion is likely, denote
them simply by aV and uV . Note that X might be a virtual representation sphere.
This means that we will not usually distinguish in notation between these maps
and their suspensions. Similarly, if R is any equivariant algebra, and x ∈ πVG S 0
then the product of x with 1 ∈ π0G R will be denoted x ∈ πVG R. In accordance with
this, at various places in this paper the symbol aV might refer to a map S −V → S 0 ,
or its suspension S 0 → S V or the Hurewicz image S 0 → HZ ∧ S V or equivalently
an element of π0G HZ ∧ S V .
Example 3.15. Let S ∞V be the colimit of the spaces S nV under the standard
inclusions. Each of these inclusions is “multiplication by aV .” Smashing with a
G-spectrum X we find that S ∞V ∧ X is the colimit of the sequence
                a             a                      a               a
                V
            X −−→ S V ∧ X −−→
                            V
                              S V ⊕V ∧ X · · · −−→
                                                 V
                                                   S nV ∧ X −−→
                                                              V
                                                                ··· .
Using the suspension isomorphism to replace π⋆G S nV ∧X with π⋆−
                                                              G
                                                                 nV X the sequence
of the RO(G)-graded groups becomes
                              a                  a
                                   G
                       π⋆G X −−V→ π⋆−V               G
                                       X · · · −−V→ π⋆− nV X · · ·
42                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


from which one gets an isomorphism
                               π⋆G S ∞V ∧ X ≈ a−1 G
                                               V π⋆ X.

Under this isomorphism the effect in RO(G)-graded homotopy groups induced by
the inclusion
                            S nV ∧ X → S ∞V ∧ X
sends x ∈ π⋆G X ≈ π⋆+V
                   G
                       S nV ∧ X to a−n     −1 G
                                    V x ∈ aV π⋆ X.

Example 3.16. Specializing Example 3.8, let G = C2n and σ the sign representation.
Consider the equivariant homology of S dσ with coefficients in the constant Mackey
functor Z. The complex of cellular chains works out to be (Example 3.8) the
complex of length (d + 1)
                                          2    0     2
                              Z−
                               → ···Z −
                                      →Z−
                                        →Z−
                                          → Z,
Our conventions provide nomenclature for the homology classes. When d is odd the
group Hd (S dσ ; Z) is zero. When d is even, the representation dσ acquires a canonical
orientation, the group HdC2 (S dσ ; Z) is canonically isomorphic to the integers, and
the preferred generator is the class udσ (Remark 3.14). For every even 0 ≤ k < d the
group HkG (S dσ ; Z) is cyclic of order 2 generated by the image of ukσ ∈ HkG (S kσ ; Z)
under the map induced by the inclusion S kσ ⊂ S dσ . As explained in Remark 3.14
this induced map is multiplication by a(d−k)σ , and so this generator corresponds to
the element
                                                G
                               a(d−k)σ · ukσ ∈ πk−dσ (HZ)
under the suspension isomorphism
                     G
                    πk−dσ (HZ) ≈ πkG (HZ ∧ S dσ ) = HkG (S dσ ; Z).
Example 3.17. Passing to the limit as d → ∞ and using the last part of Exam-
ple 3.15 we find that a(d−k)σ · ukσ is sent to

                       a−1                    −1
                        dσ · a(d−k)σ · ukσ = akσ ukσ ∈ πk S
                                                            ∞σ
                                                               .

Writing b = a−1
             2σ u2σ we find that the homogeneous component
                    C2
                   π2n HZ ∧ S ∞σ ⊂ π⋆C2 HZ ∧ S ∞σ = a−1  C2
                                                     2σ π HZ

is cyclic of order 2, generated by bn .
  We now explicitly describe the geometric fixed point spectrum of HZ when
G = C2n . The computation plays an important role in the proof of the Reduction
Theorem.
Proposition 3.18. Let G = C2n . For any G-spectrum X, the RO(G)-graded
homotopy groups of ẼP ∧ X are given by
                             π⋆G (ẼP ∧ X) = a−1 G
                                              σ π⋆ (X).

The homotopy groups of the commutative algebra ΦG HZ are given by
                                 π∗ (ΦG HZ) = Z/2[b],
where b = u2σ a−2       G       G               −1 G
               σ ∈ π2 (Φ HZ) = π2 (ẼP ∧ HZ) ⊂ aσ π⋆ HZ.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 43


  Proof: As mentioned in Remark 2.48, the space ẼP can be identified with
                                       lim S nσ .
                                       n→∞

The first assertion therefore follows from Example 3.15. The second assertion fol-
lows from Example 3.17 and the fact that the map a−1   G       G
                                                   σ π⋆ X → π⋆ ẼP ∧ X is a ring
homomorphism when X is an equivariant algebra.                                  

3.5. A gap in homology. We conclude §3 with some further observations about
S ρG −1 . Proposition 3.20 below constitutes the computational part of the Gap
Theorem, and contains the Cell Lemma as a special case.
Example 3.19. Suppose that G is not the trivial group. In §4.6.2 we will encounter
the group
                         πρGG −2 HZ ≈ HG 1
                                           (S ρG −1 ; Z),
which, by Example 3.9, is isomorphic to
                                  H 1 (S ρG −1 /G; Z).
The G-space S ρG −1 is the unreduced suspension of the unit sphere S(ρG − 1), and
so the orbit space is also a suspension. If |G| > 2 then S(ρG − 1) is connected,
hence so is the orbit space. If G = C2 , then S(ρG − 1) ≈ G and the orbit space
is still connected. In all cases then, the unreduced suspension S ρG −1 /G is simply
connected. Thus
                                 2
                   πρGG −2 HZ ≈ HG (S ρG ; Z) ≈ HG
                                                 1
                                                   (S ρG −1 ; Z) = 0.
In fact, the same argument shows that for n > 0 the orbit space S n(ρG −1) /G is
simply connected, and hence
                       0
                      HG (S n(ρG −1) ; Z) = HG
                                             1
                                               (S n(ρG −1) ; Z) = 0
or, equivalently
                          G              G
                         πn(ρG −1)
                                   HZ = πn(ρG −1)−1
                                                    HZ = 0.
  Building on this, we have
Proposition 3.20. Let G be any non-trivial finite group and n ≥ 0 an integer.
Except in case G = C3 , i = 3, n = 1 the groups
                                      i
                                     HG (S nρG ; Z)
are zero for 0 < i < 4. In the exceptional case one has
                                   3
                                  HG (S ρC3 ; Z) = Z.

  Proof: Since
                                           i−n
                          i
                         HG (S nρG ; Z) ≈ HG   (S n(ρG −1) ; Z),
                                                  i
connectivity and Example 3.19 show that HG          (S nρG ; Z) = 0 for i ≤ n + 1. This
takes care of the cases in which n + 1 ≥ 3, leaving only n = 1, and in that case only
the group
                                   HG 2
                                        (S ρG −1 ; Z)
which is isomorphic to
                                  H 2 (S ρG −1 /G; Z).
44                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Since the orbit space S ρG −1 /G is simply connected, the universal coefficient theorem
gives an inclusion
                       H 2 (S ρG −1 /G; Z) → H 2 (S ρG −1 /G; Q).
It therefore suffices to show that
                                H 2 (S ρG −1 /G; Q) = 0.
But since G is finite, this group is just the G-invariant part of
                                     H 2 (S ρG −1 ; Q)
which is zero since G does not have order 3. When G does have order 3 the group
is Q. The claim follows since the homology groups are finitely generated.     


                             4. The slice filtration
    The slice filtration is an equivariant analogue of the Postnikov tower, to which
it reduces in the case of the trivial group. In this section we introduce the slice
filtration and establish some of its basic properties. We work for the most part with
a general finite group G, though our application to the Kervaire invariant problem
involves only the case G = C2n . While the situation for general G exhibits many
remarkable properties, the reader should regard as exploratory the apparatus of
definitions at this level of generality.
    From now until the end of §11 our focus will be on homotopy theory. Though
it will not appear in the notation, all spectra should be replaced by cofibrant or
fibrant approximations where appropriate.

4.1. Slice cells.

4.1.1. Slice cells and their dimension. For a subgroup K ⊂ G let ρK denote its
regular representation, and write
                         b
                         S(m, K) = G+ ∧ S mρK            m ∈ Z.
                                          K

Definition 4.1. The set of slice cells is
                      b
                     {S(m,         b
                           K), Σ−1 S(m, K) | m ∈ Z, K ⊂ G}.
   This brings two notions of “cell” into the story: the slice cells and the cells
of the form G/H+ ∧ Dm , used to manufacture G-CW spectra. We’ll refer to the
traditional equivariant cells as “G-cells” in order to distinguish them from the slice
cells.
                                                             b
Definition 4.2. A slice cell is regular if it is of the form S(m, K).
Definition 4.3. A slice cell is induced if it is of the form
                                             b
                                        G+ ∧ S,
                                              H

where Sb is a slice cell for H and H ⊂ G is a proper subgroup. It is free if H is the
trivial group. A slice cell is isotropic if it is not free.
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 45


  Since
                           [G+ ∧ S, X]G ≈ [S, i∗H X]H     and
                               H
                           [X, G+ ∧ S]G ≈ [i∗H X, S]H ,
                                    H

induction on |G| usually reduces claims about cells to the case of those which are
not induced. The slice cells which are not induced are those of the form S mρG and
S mρG −1 .
Definition 4.4. The dimension of a slice cell is defined by
                                       b
                                   dim S(m, K) = m|K|
                                     b
                             dim Σ−1 S(m, K) = m|K| − 1.
  In other words the dimension of a slice cell is that of its underlying spheres.
Remark 4.5. Not every suspension of a slice cell is a slice cell. Typically, the
spectrum Σ−2 S(m,b   K) will not be a slice cell, and will not exhibit the properties of
                              b
a slice cell of dimension dim S(m, K) − 2.
  The following is immediate from the definition.
Proposition 4.6. Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup. If Sb is a G-slice cell of dimension
d, then i∗H Sb is a wedge of H-slice cells of dimension d. If Sb is an H-slice cell of
dimension d then G+ ∧ Sb is a G-slice cell of dimension d.                          
                       H

  The regular slice cells behave well under the norm.
Proposition 4.7. Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup. If W     c is a wedge of regular H-slice
             Gc
cells, then NH W is a wedge of regular G-slice cells.

   Proof: The wedges of regular H-slice cells are exactly the indexed wedges (in
the sense of §2.3.2) of spectra of the form S mρK for K ⊂ H, and m ∈ Z. Since
regular representations induce to regular representations, the identity (2.11) and
the distribution formula (Proposition A.37) show that the norm of such an indexed
wedge is an indexed wedge of S mρK with K ⊂ G and m ∈ Z. The claim follows. 

4.1.2. Slice positive and slice null spectra. Underlying the theory of the Postnikov
tower is the notion of “connectivity” and the class of (n − 1)-connected spectra.
In this section we describe the slice analogues of these ideas. There is a simple
relationship between “connectivity” and “slice-positivity” which we will describe in
detail in §4.4.
Definition 4.8. A G-spectrum Y is slice n-null, written
                                Y < n or Y ≤ n − 1
if for every slice cell S with dim Sb ≥ n the G-space
                        b
                                         b Y)
                                     SG (S,
                                     ¯
is equivariantly contractible. A G-spectrum X is slice n-positive, written
                                X > n or     X ≥n+1
46                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


if
                                      SG (X, Y )
                                      ¯
is equivariantly contractible for every Y with Y ≤ n.
  We will use the terms slice-positive and slice-null instead of “slice 0-positive”
and “slice 0-null.” The full subcategory of SG consisting of X with X > n will be
denoted SG         G                                        G
          >n or S≥n+1 . Similarly, the full subcategory of S consisting of X with
                         G       G
X < n will be denoted S<n or S≤n−1 .
Remark 4.9. The category SG   >n is the smallest full subcategory of S
                                                                       G
                                                                           containing
                b          b
the slice cells S with dim S > n and possessing the following properties:
      i) If X is weakly equivalent to an object of SG                  G
                                                    >n , then X is in S>n .
     ii) Arbitrary wedges of objects of SG           G
                                          >n are in S>n .
    iii) If X → Y → Z is a cofibration sequence and X and Y are in SG     >n then so
         is Z.
    iv) If X → Y → Z is a cofibration sequence and X and Z are in SG      >n then so
         is Y .
More briefly, these properties are that SG>n is closed under weak equivalences, ho-
motopy colimits (properties ii) and iii)), and extensions.
Remark 4.10. The fiber of a map of slice n-positive spectra is not assumed to be
slice n-positive, and need not be. For example, the fiber of ∗ → S ρG is S ρG −1 which
is not slice (|G| − 1)-positive, even though both ∗ and S ρG are.
      For n = 0, −1, the notions of slice n-null and slice n-positive are familiar.
Proposition 4.11. For a G-spectrum X the following hold
     i) X ≥ 0 ⇐⇒ X is (−1)-connected, i.e. π k X = 0 for k < 0;
     ii) X ≥ −1 ⇐⇒ X is (−2)-connected, i.e. π k X = 0 for k < −1;
 iii) X < 0 ⇐⇒ X is 0-coconnected, i.e. π k X = 0 for k ≥ 0;
 iv) X < −1 ⇐⇒ X is (−1)-coconnected, i.e. π k X = 0 for k ≥ −1;

   Proof: These are all straightforward consequences of the fact that S 0 is a slice
cell of dimension 0, and S −1 is a slice cell of dimension (−1).                  

Remark 4.12. It is not the case that if Y > 0 then π0 Y = 0. In Proposition 4.15 we
will see that the fiber F of S 0 → HZ has the property that F > 0. On the other
hand π 0 F is the augmentation ideal of the Burnside ring. Proposition 4.48 below
gives a characterization of slice-positive spectra.
   The classes of slice n-null and slice n-positive spectra are preserved under change
of group.
Proposition 4.13. Suppose H ⊂ G, that X is a G-spectrum and Y is an H-
spectrum. The following implications hold
                                X > n =⇒ i∗H X > n
                                X < n =⇒ i∗H X < n
                                Y > n =⇒ G+ ∧ Y > n
                                                  H
                                 Y < n =⇒ G+ ∧ Y < n.
                                                  H
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                47


   Proof: The second and third implications are straightforward consequences of
Proposition 4.6. The fourth implication follows from the Wirthmüller isomorphism
and Proposition 4.6, and the first implication is an immediate consequence of the
fourth.                                                                         

   We end this section with a mild simplification of the condition that a spectrum
be slice n-null.

Lemma 4.14. For a G-spectrum X, the following are equivalent

  i) X < n;

 ii) For all slice cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ n, [S,
                                              b X]G = 0.


   Proof: The first condition trivially implies the second. We prove that the second
implies the first by induction on |G|. By the induction hypothesis we may assume
that the G-space
                                           b X)
                                       SG (S,
                                       ¯
is contractible for all induced slice cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ n, and that for all slice
cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ n, and all proper H ⊂ G, the space
                                         b X)H
                                     SG (S,
                                    ¯
is contractible. We therefore also know that the G-space
                                               b X)
                                       SG (T ∧ S,
                                       ¯
is contractible, for all slice cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ n and all (−1)-connected G-CW
spectra T built entirely from induced G-cells. We must show that for each t ≥ 0,
the groups

                         [S t ∧ S mρG −1 , X]G        m|G| − 1 ≥ n
                               t     mρG          G
                            [S ∧ S         , X]        m|G| ≥ n


are zero. They are zero by assumption when t = 0. For t > 0, the first case is a
special case of the second, since S 1 ∧ S mρG −1 is a slice cell of dimension m|G|. Let
T be the homotopy fiber of the map

                                       S t ⊂ S tρG ,

and consider the exact sequence

              [S tρG ∧ S mρG , X]G → [S t ∧ S mρG , X]G → [T ∧ S mρG , X]G .

The leftmost group is zero since S tρG ∧ S mρG is a slice cell of dimension (t +
m)|G| ≥ n. The rightmost group is zero by the induction hypothesis since T is
(−1)-connected and built entirely from induced G-cells. It follows from exactness
that the middle group is zero.                                                 
48                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


4.2. The slice tower. Let P n X be the Bousfield localization, or Dror Farjoun
nullification ([19, 30]) of X with respect to the class SG
                                                         >n , and Pn+1 X the homotopy
fiber of X → P n X. Thus, by definition, there is a functorial fibration sequence
                                Pn+1 X → X → P n X.
     The functor P n X can be constructed as the colimit of a sequence of functors
                                W0 X → W1 X → · · · .
The Wi X are defined inductively starting with W0 X = X, and taking Wk X to be
the cofiber of                 _
                                  Σt Sb → Wk−1 X,
                                   I

in which the indexing set I is the set of maps Σt Sb → Wk−1 X with Sb > n a slice cell
and t ≥ 0. By Lemma 4.14 the functors P n can also be formed using the analogous
construction using only slice cells themselves, and not their suspensions.
Proposition 4.15. A spectrum X is slice n-positive if an only if it admits (up to
weak equivalence) a filtration
                                 X0 ⊂ X1 ⊂ · · ·
                                W
whose associated graded spectrum Xk /Xk−1 is a wedge of slice cells of dimension
greater than n. For any spectrum X, Pn+1 X is slice n-positive.

     Proof: This follows easily from the construction of P n X described above.      
   The map Pn+1 X → X is characterized up to a contractible space of choices by
the properties
      i) for all X, Pn+1 X ∈ SG>n ;
                      G
     ii) for all A ∈ S>n and all X, the map SG (A, Pn+1 X) → SG (A, X) is a weak
                                              ¯                ¯
         equivalence of G-spaces.
In other words, Pn+1 X → X is the “universal map” from an object of SG    >n to X.
Similarly X → P n X is the universal map from X to a slice (n + 1)-null G-spectrum
Z. More specifically
    iii) the spectrum P n X is slice (n + 1)-null;
    iv) for any slice (n + 1)-null Z, the map
                            SG (P n X, Z) → SG (X, Z)
                            ¯                ¯
       is a weak equivalence.
These conditions lead to a useful recognition principle.
Lemma 4.16. Suppose X is a G-spectrum and that
                                  P̃n+1 → X → P̃ n
is a fibration sequence with the property that P̃ n ≤ n and P̃n+1 > n. Then the
canonical maps P̃n+1 → Pn+1 X and P n X → P̃ n are weak equivalences.

  Proof: We show that the map X → P̃ n satisfies the universal property of P n X.
Suppose that Z ≤ n, and consider the fibration sequence of G-spaces
                       SG (P̃ n , Z) → SG (X, Z) → SG (P̃n+1 , Z)
                       ¯               ¯           ¯
                                  KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                           49


The rightmost space is contractible since P̃n+1 > n, so the map SG (P̃ n , Z) →
                                                                   ¯
SG (X, Z) is a weak equivalence.                                               
¯
   The following consequence of Lemma 4.16 is used in the proof of the Reduction
Theorem.
Corollary 4.17. Suppose that X → Y → Z is a cofibration sequence, and that the
mapping cone of P n X → P n Y is slice (n + 1)-null. Then both
                                   P nX → P nY → P nZ
and
                             Pn+1 X → Pn+1 Y → Pn+1 Z
are cofibration sequences.

  Proof: Consider the diagram
                        Pn+1 X           / Pn+1 Y       / P̃n+1 Z

                                                           
                             X             /Y              /Z

                                                             
                         P nX             / P nY         / P̃ n Z

in which the rows and columns are cofibration sequences. By construction, P̃n+1 Z
is slice n-positive (Remark 4.9). If P̃ n Z ≤ n then the right column satisfies the
condition of 4.16, and the result follows.                                       
  Since SG     G
         >n ⊂ S>n−1 , there is a natural transformation

                                     P n X → P n−1 X.
Definition 4.18. The slice tower of X is the tower {P n X}n∈Z . The spectrum
P n X is the nth slice section of X.
  When considering more than one group, we will write P n X = PGn X and Pn X =
PnG X.
  Let Pnn X be the fiber of the map
                                     P n X → P n−1 X.
Definition 4.19. The n-slice of a spectrum X is Pnn X. A spectrum X is an n-slice
if X = Pnn X.
   The spectrum Pn+1 X is analogous to the n-connected cover of X, and for two
values of n they coincide. The following is a straightforward consequence of Propo-
sition 4.11.
Proposition 4.20. For any spectrum X, P0 X is the (−1)-connected cover of X
and P−1 X is the (−2)-connected cover of X. The (−1)-slice of X is given by
                                    −1
                                   P−1 X = Σ−1 Hπ −1 X.
                                                                                   
   The formation of slice sections and therefore of the slices themselves behave well
with respect to change of group.
50                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Proposition 4.21. The functor P n commutes with both restriction to a subgroup
and left induction. More precisely, given H ⊂ G there are natural weak equivalences
                                i∗H (PGn X) → PH
                                               n ∗
                                                 (iH X)
and
                                   n
                            G+ ∧ (PH X) → PGn (G+ ∧ X).
                                H                      H


     Proof: This is an easy consequence of Lemma 4.16 and Proposition 4.13.          

Remark 4.22. When G is the trivial group the slice cells are just ordinary cells
and the slice tower becomes the Postnikov tower. It therefore follows from Propo-
sition 4.21 that the tower of non-equivariant spectra underlying the slice tower is
the Postnikov tower.
4.3. Multiplicative properties of the slice tower. The slice filtration does not
quite have the multiplicative properties one might expect. In this section we collect
a few results describing how things work. One important result is Corollary 4.32
asserting that the slice sections of a (−1)-connected commutative or associative
algebra are (−1)-connected commutative or associative algebras. We’ll show in §4.7
the slice filtration is multiplicative for the special class of “pure” spectra, defined
in §4.6.2.
Lemma 4.23. Smashing with S mρG gives a bijection of the set of slice cells Sb with
dim Sb = k and those with dim Sb = k + m|G|.

     Proof: Since the restriction of ρG to K ⊂ G is |G/K|ρK there is an identity
          S ρG ∧ (G+ ∧ S mρK ) ≈ G+ ∧ (S ρG ∧ S mρK ) ≈ G+ ∧ S (|G/K|+m)ρK .
                     K                 K                     K
The result follows easily from this.                                                 

Corollary 4.24. Smashing with S mρG gives an equivalence
                                    SG     G
                                     ≥n → S≥n+m|G| .
                                                                                     
Corollary 4.25. The natural maps
                      S mρG ∧ Pk+1 X → Pk+m|G|+1 (S mρG ∧ X)
                         S mρG ∧ P k X → P k+m|G| (S mρG ∧ X)


are weak equivalences.                                                               
Proposition 4.26. If X ≥ n, Y ≥ m, and n is divisible by |G| then X ∧Y ≥ n+m.

   Proof: By smashing X with S (−n/|G|)ρG and using Corollary 4.25 we may assume
n = 0. Suppose that Z < m. Since Y ≥ m, the zero space of function spectrum Z Y
is contractible, and so Z Y is 0-coconnected. Since X is (−1)-connected (Proposi-
tion 4.11)
                             SG (X ∧ Y, Z) ≈ SG (X, Z Y )
                            ¯                ¯
is contractible and so X ∧ Y ≥ m.                                              
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             51


Definition 4.27. A map X → Y is a P n -equivalence if P n X → P n Y is an equiv-
alence. Equivalently, X → Y is a P n -equivalence if for every Z < n, the map
                                 SG (Y, Z) → SG (X, Z)
                                 ¯           ¯
is a weak equivalence.
Lemma 4.28. If the homotopy fiber F of f : X → Y is in SG
                                                        >n , then f is a a P
                                                                             n

equivalence.

  Proof: Immediate from the fibration sequence
                          SG (Y, Z) → SG (X, Z) → SG (F, Z).
                          ¯           ¯           ¯
                                                                                  

Remark 4.29. The converse of the above result is not true. For instance, ∗ → S 0 is
a P −1 -equivalence, but the fiber S −1 is not in SG
                                                   >−1 .

Lemma 4.30. i) If Y → Z is a P n -equivalence and X ≥ 0, then X ∧Y → X ∧Z
is a P n -equivalence;
 ii) For X1 , . . . , Xk ∈ SG
                            ≥0 , the map

                         X1 ∧ · · · ∧ Xk → P n X1 ∧ · · · ∧ P n Xk
is a P n -equivalence.

  Proof: Since Pn+1 X and Pn+1 Y are both slice n-positive the vertical map in the
square below are P n -equivalences by Lemmas 4.28 and 4.26
                                 X ∧Y             / X∧Z

                                                     
                               X ∧ P nY         / X ∧ P nZ .
The bottom row is a weak equivalence by assumption. It follows that the top row
is a P n -equivalence. The second assertion is proved by induction on k, the case
k = 1 being trivial. For the induction step consider
            X1 ∧ · · · ∧ Xk−1 ∧ Xk           / P n X1 ∧ · · · ∧ P n Xk−1 ∧ Xk


                                                              
                                           P n X1 ∧ · · · ∧ P n Xk−1 ∧ P n Xk .
The first map is a P n -equivalence by the induction hypothesis and part i). The
second map is a P n -equivalence by part i).                                  

Remark 4.31. Lemma 4.30 can be described as asserting that the functor
                                             n                  o
             P n : {(−1)-connected spectra} → SG
                                               >n -null spectra

is weakly monoidal.
Corollary 4.32. Let R be a (−1)-connected G-spectrum. If R is a homotopy
commutative or homotopy associative algebra, then so is P n R for all n. 
52                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The following additional results are proved in §B.9. The first two are Proposi-
tions B.171, B.177, and the third is easily deduced from Proposition B.179.
Proposition 4.33. Suppose that n ≥ 0 is an integer. If A is a slice (n− 1)-positive
                 G
H-spectrum then NH A is a slice (n − 1)-positive G-spectrum.                     
Proposition 4.34. Suppose that n ≥ 0 is an integer. If A is a slice (n − 1)-
positive G-spectrum then for every m > 0, the symmetric smash power Symm A is
slice (n − 1)-positive.                                                    
Proposition 4.35. Suppose that n ≥ 0 is an integer. If R is a (−1)-connected equi-
variant commutative ring, then the slice section P n R can be given a the structure
of an equivariant commutative ring in such a way that R → P n R is a commutative
ring homomorphism. Moreover this commutative ring structure is unique.           
4.4. The slice spectral sequence. The slice spectral sequence is the homotopy
spectral of the slice tower. The main point of this section is to establish strong
convergence of the slice spectral sequence, and to show that for any X the E2 -term
is distributed in the gray region of Figure 1. We begin with some results relating
the slice sections to Postnikov sections.
4.4.1. Connectivity and the slice filtration. Our convergence result for the slice spec-
tral sequence depends on knowing how slice cells are constructed from G-cells. We
will say that a space or spectrum X decomposes into the elements of a collection
of spectra {Tα } if X is weakly equivalent to a spectrum X̃ admitting an increasing
filtration
                                     X0 ⊂ X1 ⊂ · · ·
with the property that Xn /Xn−1 is weakly equivalent to a wedge of Tα .
Remark 4.36. A G-spectrum X decomposes into a collection of spectra {G/H+ ∧
S m }, with H and m ranging through some indexing list, if and only if X is weakly
equivalent a G-CW spectrum with G-cells of the form G/H+ ∧ Dm , with H and m
ranging through the same list.
Remark 4.37. To say that X decomposes into the elements of a collection of compact
objects {Tα } means that X is in the smallest subcategory of SG closed under weak
                                                             ¯
equivalences, arbitrary wedges, and the formation of mapping cones and extensions
(i.e., the properties listed in Remark 4.9).
Lemma 4.38. Let Sb be a slice cell. If dim Sb = n ≥ 0, then Sb decomposes into the
spectra G/H+ ∧ S k with ⌊n/|G|⌋ ≤ k ≤ n. If dim Sb = n < 0 then Sb decomposes
into G/H+ ∧ S k with n ≤ k ≤ ⌊n/|G|⌋.

   Proof: The cell structure of S ρG −1 described in Example 3.4 has G-cells rang-
ing in dimension from 0 to |G| − 1, and suspends to a cell decomposition of S ρG
with G-cells whose dimension ranges from 1 to |G|. The cases Sb = S mρG and
Sb = S mρG −1 with m ≥ 0 are handled by smashing these together and passing to
suspension spectra. For m < 0, Spanier-Whitehead duality gives an equivariant cell
decomposition of S mρG into cells whose dimensions range from m|G| to m and of
Σ−1 S mρG into cells whose dimensions range from n = m|G| − 1 to m − 1 = ⌊n/|G|⌋.
Finally, the case in which Sb is induced from a subgroup K ⊂ G is proved by left
inducing its K-equivariant cell decomposition.                                  
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                   53


Corollary 4.39. Let Y ∈ SG
                         ≥n . If n ≥ 0, then Y can be decomposed into the spectra
G/H+ ∧S m with m ≥ ⌊n/|G|⌋. If n ≤ 0 then Y can be decomposed into G/H+ ∧S m
with m ≥ n.

   Proof: The class of G-spectra Y which can be decomposed into G/H+ ∧ S m with
m ≥ ⌊n/|G|⌋ is closed under weak equivalences, homotopy colimits, and extensions.
By Lemma 4.38 it contains the slice cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ n. It therefore contains
all Y ∈ SG
         ≥n by Remark 4.9. A similar argument handles the case n < 0.            

Proposition 4.40. Write g = |G|.
  i) If n ≥ 0 and k > n then (G/H)+ ∧ S k > n.
 ii) If m ≤ −1 and k ≥ m then (G/H)+ ∧ S k ≥ (m + 1)g − 1.
iii) If Y ≥ n with n ≥ 0, then π i Y = 0 for i < ⌊n/g⌋.
iv) If Y ≥ n with n ≤ 0, then π i Y = 0 for i < n.

   Proof: We start with the first assertion. We will prove the claim by induction
on |G|, the case of the trivial group being obvious. Using Proposition 4.13 we may
assume by induction that (G/H)+ ∧ S k > n when n ≥ 0 and H ⊂ G is a proper
subgroup. This implies that if T is an equivariant CW-spectrum built from G-cells
of the form (G/H)+ ∧ S k with k > n and H ⊂ G a proper subgroup, then T > n.
The homotopy fiber of the natural inclusion
                                      S k → S kρG
can be identified with the suspension spectrum of S(kρG − k)+ ∧ S k , and so is such
a T . Since S kρG ≥ k|G| ≥ kg > n the fibration sequence
                                   T → S k → S kρG
exhibits S k as an extension of two slice n-positive spectra, making it slice n-positive.
The second assertion is trivial for k ≥ 0 since in that case G/H+ ∧ S k ≥ 0 and
(m + 1)g − 1 ≤ −1. The case k ≤ −1 is handled by writing
             (G/H)+ ∧ S k = Σ−1 (G/H)+ ∧ S (k+1)ρG ∧ S −(k+1)(ρG −1) .
Since −(k + 1) ≥ 0, the spectrum S −(k+1)(ρG −1) is a suspension spectrum and so
                    (G/H)+ ∧ S k ≥ (k + 1)g − 1 ≥ (m + 1)g − 1.
The third and fourth assertions are immediate from Corollary 4.39.                     

Remark 4.41. We’ve stated part ii) of Proposition 4.40 in the form in which it is
most clearly proved. When it comes up, it is needed as the implication that for
n < 0,
                       k ≥ ⌊(n + 1)/g⌋ =⇒ G/H+ ∧ S k > n.
To relate these, write m = ⌊(n + 1)/g⌋, so that
                                  m + 1 > (n + 1)/g
and by part ii) of Proposition 4.40
                          G/H+ ∧ S k ≥ (m + 1)g − 1 > n.
54                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL



4.4.2. The spectral sequence. The slice spectral sequence is the spectral sequence
associated to the tower of fibration {P n X}, and it takes the form
                           E2s,t = πt−s
                                    G
                                        Ptt X =⇒ πt−s
                                                  G
                                                      X.
It can be regarded as a spectral sequence of Mackey functors, or of individual
homotopy groups. We have chosen our indexing so that the display of the spectral
sequence is in accord with the classical Adams spectral sequence: the Ers,t -term is
placed in the plane in position (t − s, s). The situation is depicted in Figure 1. The
differential dr maps Ers,t to Ers+r,t+r−1 , or in terms the display in the plane, the
group in position (t − s, s) to the group in position (t − s − 1, s + r).
   The following is an immediate consequence of Proposition 4.40. As there, we
write g = |G|.
Theorem 4.42. Let X be a G-spectrum. The Mackey functor homotopy groups of
P n X satisfy                   (
                                  k>n             if n ≥ 0
              π k P n X = 0 for
                                  k ≥ ⌊(n + 1)/g⌋ if n < 0
and the map X → P n X induces an isomorphism
                                  (
                  ≈                 k < ⌊(n + 1)/g⌋           if n ≥ 0
                  → π k P n X for
             πk X −
                                    k≤n                       if n < 0 .
Thus for any X,
                                      lim P n X
                                      −→n
is contractible, the map
                                   X → lim P n X
                                       ←−
                                          n
is a weak equivalence, and for each k, the map
                               {πk (X)} → {π k P n X}
from the constant tower to the slice tower of Mackey functors is a pro-isomorphism.
                                                                                 
Corollary 4.43. If M is an n-slice then
                                      πk M = 0
if n ≥ 0 and k lies outside of the region ⌊n/g⌋ ≤ k ≤ n, or if n < 0 and k lies
outside of the region n ≤ k < ⌊(n + 1)/g⌋.                                   
    Theorem 4.42 gives the strong convergence of the slice spectral sequence, while
Corollary 4.43 shows that the E2 -term vanishes outside of a restricted range of
dimensions. The situation is depicted in Figure 1. The homotopy groups of indi-
vidual slices lie along lines of slope −1, and the groups contributing to π ∗ P n X lie
to the left of a line of slope −1 intersecting the (t − s)-axis at (t − s) = n. All of
the groups outside the gray region are zero. The vanishing in the regions labeled
1-4 correspond to the four parts of Proposition 4.40.
    Proposition 4.40 also gives a relationship between the Postnikov tower and the
slice tower.
Corollary 4.44. If X is an (n − 1)-connected G-spectrum with n ≥ 0 then X ≥ n.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             55




                      Figure 1. The slice spectral sequence


   Proof: The assumption on X means it is weakly equivalent to a G-CW spectrum
having G-cells G/H+ ∧S m only in dimensions m ≥ n. By part i) of Proposition 4.40
these are in SG
              ≥n .                                                             
   We end this section with an application. The next result says that if a tower
looks like the slice tower, then it is the slice tower.
Proposition 4.45. Suppose that X → {P̃ n } is a map from X to a tower of
fibrations with the properties
  i) the map X → lim P̃ n is a weak equivalence;
                 ←−
 ii) the spectrum limn P̃ n is contractible;
                  −→
iii) for all n, the fiber of the map P̃ n → P̃ n−1 is an n-slice.
Then P̃ n is the slice tower of X.


  Proof: We first show that P̃ n is slice (n + 1)-null. We will use the criteria of
Lemma 4.14. Suppose that Sb is a slice cell with dim Sb > n. By condition iii), the
maps
                   b P̃ n ]G → [S,
                  [S,           b P̃ n−1 ]G → [S,
                                               b P̃ n−2 ]G → · · ·
56                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


are all monomorphisms. Since Sb is finite, the map
                               b P̃ k ]G → [S,
                          lim [S,            b lim P̃ k ]G
                          −→                   −→
                            k≤n                      k≤n

is an isomorphism. It then follows from assumption ii) that [S, b P̃ n ]G = 0. This
             n
shows that P̃ is slice (n + 1)-null. Now let P̃n+1 be the homotopy fiber of the map
X → P̃ n . By Lemma 4.16, the result will follow if we can show P̃n+1 > n. By
assumption iii), for any N > n + 1, the spectrum
                                      P̃n+1 ∪ C P̃N
admits a finite filtration whose layers are m-slices, with m ≥ n + 1. It follows that
                                  P̃n+1 ∪ C P̃N > n.
In view of the cofibration sequence
                            P̃N → P̃n+1 → P̃n+1 ∪ C P̃N ,
to show that P̃n+1 > n it suffices to show that P̃N > n for some N > n.
   Let Z be any slice (n + 1)-null spectrum. We need to show that the G-space
                                     SG (P̃N , Z)
                                     ¯
is contractible. We do this by studying the Mackey functor homotopy groups of the
spectra involved, and appealing to an argument using the usual equivariant notion
of connectivity. By Theorem 4.42, there is an integer m with the property that for
k > m,
                                      π k Z = 0.
By Corollary 4.43 and assumption iii), for N ≫ 0 and any N ′ > N ,
                            π k P̃N ∪ C P̃N ′ = 0,     k ≤ m,
so
                                   π k P̃N ′ → π k P̃N
is an isomorphism for k ≤ m. Since holimN ′ P̃N ′ is contractible this implies that
                                       ←−
for N ≫ 0
                             π k P̃N = 0, k ≤ m.
Thus for N ≫ 0, P̃N is m-connected in the usual sense and so
                                       SG (P̃N , Z)
                                       ¯
is contractible.                                                                   

4.5. The RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence. Applying RO(G)-graded ho-
motopy groups to the slice tower leads to an RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence
                        E2s,V = πVG−s Pdim
                                       dim V       G
                                           V X =⇒ πV −s X.
The grading convention is chosen so that it restricts to the one of §4.4.2 when V is
a trivial virtual representation. The rth differential is a map
                                              s+r,V +(r−1)
                             dr : E2s,V → E2                 .
The RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence is a sum of spectral sequences, one for
each element of RO(G)/Z. We will call the spectral sequence corresponding to
the coset V + Z ∈ RO(G)/Z the slice spectral sequence for πVG+∗ X. This spectral
sequence can be displayed on the (x, y)-plane, and we will do so following Adams
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  57


conventions, with the term E2s,V +t displayed at a position with x-coordinate (V +
t − s) and y-coordinate s. For an example, see Figures 2, 3 and 4 in §9.
4.6. Special slices. In this section we investigate special slices of spectra, and
introduce the notion of a spectrum with cellular slices, and of a pure G-spectrum.
Our main result (Proposition 4.59) asserts that a map X → Y of G-spectra with
cellular slices is a weak equivalence if and only if the underlying map of non-
equivariant spectra is. This result plays an important role in the proof of the
Reduction Theorem in §7. We also include material useful for investigating the
slices of more general spectra.
4.6.1. Slice positive spectra, 0-slices and (−1)-slices. In this section we will describe
methods for determining the slices of spectra, and introduce a convenient class of
equivariant spectra. Our first results make use of the isotropy separation sequence
(§2.5.2) obtained by smashing with the cofibration sequence of pointed G-spaces
                                  EP+ → S 0 → ẼP.
The space EP+ is an equivariant CW-complex built from G-cells of the form
(G/H)+ ∧ S n with H ⊂ G a proper subgroup. It follows that if W is a pointed G-
space whose H-fixed points are contractible for all proper H ⊂ G, then T G (EP+ , W )
is contractible.
Lemma 4.46. Fix an integer d. If X is a G-spectrum with the property that
i∗H X > d for all proper H ⊂ G, then EP+ ∧ X > d.

  Proof: Suppose that Z ≤ d. Then
                   SG (EP+ ∧ X, Z) ≈ T G (EP+ , SG (X, Z)).
                   ¯                            ¯
By the assumption on X, the G-space SG (X, Z) has contractible H fixed points
                                    ¯
for all proper H ⊂ G. The Lemma now follows from the remark preceding its
statement.                                                                 

Lemma 4.47. Write g = |G|. The suspension spectrum of ẼP is in SG
                                                                 ≥g−1 .


  Proof: The map ẼP ∧ S 0 → ẼP ∧ S ρG −1 is a weak equivalence (Proposition 2.45
and Remark 2.49). The suspension spectrum of ẼP is in SG    ≥0 , since it is (−1)-
connected (Proposition 4.11). So ẼP ∧ S ρG −1 ≥ g − 1 by Proposition 4.26.      

Proposition 4.48. A G-spectrum X is slice positive if and only if it is (−1) con-
nected and π0u X = 0 (i.e.,the non-equivariant spectrum i∗0 X underlying X is 0-
connected).

   Proof: The only if assertion follows from the fact that the slice cells of positive
dimension are (−1)-connected and have 0-connected underlying spectra. The “if”
assertion is proved by induction on |G|, the case of the trivial group being trivial.
For the induction step we may assume X is (−1)-connected and has the property
that i∗H X > 0 for all proper H ⊂ G. Consider the isotropy separation sequence for
X
                             EP+ ∧ X → X → ẼP ∧ X.
58                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


The leftmost term is slice-positive by Lemma 4.46, and the rightmost term is by
Propositions 4.11 and 4.26, and Lemma 4.47. It follows that X is slice-positive. 

Example 4.49. Suppose that f : S → S ′ is a surjective map of G-sets. Proposi-
tion 4.48 implies that the suspension spectrum of the mapping cone of f is slice
positive. This implies that if HM is an Eilenberg-MacLane spectrum which is a zero
slice then for every surjective S → S ′ the map M (S ′ ) → M (S) is a monomorphism.
The proposition below shows that this is also a sufficient condition.
Proposition 4.50. i) A spectrum X is a (−1)-slice if and only if it is of the
form X = Σ−1 HM , with M an arbitrary Mackey functor.
  ii) A spectrum X is a 0-slice if and only if it is of the form HM with M a Mackey
functor all of whose restriction maps are monomorphisms.
Remark 4.51. The condition on M in ii) is that if S → S ′ is a surjective map
of finite G-sets then M (S ′ ) → M (S) is a monomorphism. Let G act on G × S
and G × S ′ through its left action on G. Then G × S → G × S ′ has a section,
so M (G × S ′ ) → M (G × S) is always a monomorphism. Using this one easily
checks that condition is also equivalent to requiring that for every finite G-set S ′ ,
the map M (S ′ ) → M (G × S ′ ), induced by the action mapping G × S ′ → S ′ , is a
monomorphism.

   Proof: The first assertion is immediate from Proposition 4.20, which, combined
with part i) of Proposition 4.40, also shows that a 0-slice is an Eilenberg-MacLane
spectrum. Example 4.49 gives the “only if” part of the second assertion. For the
“if” part, suppose that M is a Mackey functor all of whose restrictions maps are
monomorphisms, and consider the sequence
                               P1 HM → HM → P 0 HM.
Since P1 HM ≥ 0 it is (−1)-connected, and so P1 HM is an Eilenberg-MacLane
spectrum. For convenience, write
                                   M ′ = π 0 P1 HM
                                  M ′′ = π 0 P 0 HM
so that there is a short exact sequence
                                  M ′ ֌ M ։ M ′′ .
Suppose that S is any finite G-set and consider the following diagram
                     M ′ (S)           / M (S)           / M ′′ (S)


                                                              
                  M ′ (G × S)       / M (G × S)        / M ′′ (G × S)

in which the rows are short exact, and the vertical maps are induced by the action
mapping, as in Remark 4.51. The bottom right arrow is an isomorphism since
i∗0 HM → i∗0 P 0 HM is an equivalence. Thus M ′ (G × S) = 0 (this also follows from
Proposition 4.48). The claim now follows from a simple diagram chase.             

Remark 4.52. The second assertion of Proposition 4.50 can also be deduced directly
from Corollary 3.6.
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  59


Corollary 4.53. If X = HM is a zero slice and π0u X = 0 then X is contractible.
                                                                             
Corollary 4.54. The (−1)-slice of S −1 is Σ−1 HA. The zero slice of S 0 is HZ.

   Proof: The first assertion follows easily from Part i) of Proposition 4.50. For the
second assertion note that the S 0 → HA is a P 0 -equivalence, so the zero slice of
S 0 is P 0 HA. Consider the fibration sequence
                                  HI → HA → HZ,
in which I = ker A → Z is the augmentation ideal. The leftmost term is slice
positive by Proposition 4.48, and the rightmost term is in SG
                                                            ≤0 by Proposition 4.50.
The claim now follows from Lemma 4.16.                                           
                                             b
Corollary 4.55. For K ⊂ G, the m|K|-slice of S(m, K) is
                                   b
                              HZ ∧ S(m,  K)
                                b
and the (m|K| − 1)-slice of Σ−1 S(m, K) is
                                           b
                                  HA ∧ Σ−1 S(m, K).

  Proof: Using the fact that G+ ∧ ( − ) commutes with the formation of the slice
                                    K
tower (Proposition 4.21) it suffices to consider the case K = G. The result then
follows from Corollaries 4.25 and 4.54.                                        

4.6.2. Cellular slices, isotropic and pure spectra.
Definition 4.56. A d-slice is cellular if it is of the form HZ ∧ W    c , where W c is a
                                                                      c can be written
wedge of slice cells of dimension d. A cellular slice is isotropic if W
as a wedge of slice cells, none of which is free (i.e., of the form G+ ∧ S n ). A cellular
                 c can be written as a wedge of regular slice cells (those of the form
slice is pure if W
b
S(m, K), and not Σ−1 S(m,b    K)).
Definition 4.57. A G-spectrum X has cellular slices if Pnn X is cellular for all d,
and is isotropic or pure if its slices are isotropic or pure.
Lemma 4.58. Suppose that f : X → Y is a map of cellular d-slices and πdu f is an
isomorphism. Then f is a weak equivalence.

   Proof: The proof is by induction on |G|. If G is the trivial group, the result is
obvious since X and Y are Eilenberg-MacLane spectra. Now suppose we know the
result for all proper H ⊂ G, and consider the map of isotropy separation sequences
                          EP+ ∧ X          /X         / ẼP ∧ X


                                                          
                          EP+ ∧ Y          /Y         / ẼP ∧ Y .
By the induction hypothesis, the left vertical map is a weak equivalence. If d is not
congruent to 0 or −1 modulo |G| then the rightmost terms are contractible, since
every slice cell of dimension d is induced. Smashing with S mρG for suitable m, we
60                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


may therefore assume d = 0 or d = −1. Smashing with S 1 in case d = −1 we
reduce to the case d = 0 and therefore assume that X = HM0 and Y = HM1 with
M0 and M1 permutation Mackey functors. The result then follows from part iv) of
Lemma 3.3.                                                                   

Proposition 4.59. Suppose that X and Y have cellular slices. If f : X → Y has
the property that π∗u f is an isomorphism. Then f is a weak equivalence.

     Proof: It suffices to show that for each d the induced map of slices
(4.60)                                 Pdd X → Pdd Y
is a weak equivalence. Since the map of ordinary spectra underlying the slice tower
is the Postnikov tower, the map satisfies the conditions of Lemma 4.58, and the
result follows.                                                                  
     For certain slices, the condition on Y in Proposition 4.59 can be dropped.
Lemma 4.61. Suppose that f : X → Y is a map of 0-slices and X is cellular. If
π0u f is an isomorphism then f is an equivalence.

   Proof: Write X = HM and Y = HM ′ , and let S be a finite G-set. Consider the
diagram
                                            ∴∼      / M ′ (S)
                               M (S)
                                ∼                           mono
                                                       
                            M (G × S)G           / M ′ (G × S)G
                                            ∼

in which the vertical maps come from the action mapping G × S → S (see the
discussion preceding Lemma 3.3). The bottom arrow is an isomorphism by as-
sumption. The vertical maps are monomorphisms by Proposition 4.50. The left
vertical map is an isomorphism since M is a permutation Mackey functor (part ii)
of Lemma 3.3). The result follows.                                            

Proposition 4.62. Suppose that f : X → Y is a map of d-slices, X is cellular and
d 6≡ −1 mod p for any prime p dividing |G|. If πdu X → πdu Y is an isomorphism
then f is a weak equivalence.

   Proof: Let C be the mapping cone of f . We know that C ≥ d. We will show
that
                                        b C]G = 0
                                       [S,
for all slice cells Sb with dim Sb ≥ d. This will show (Lemma 4.14) that C < d and
hence must be contractible since its identity map is null. The assertion is obvious
when G is the trivial group. By induction on |G| we may assume Sb is not induced.
If d is divisible by |G| we may smash with S −d/|G| ρG and reduce to the case d = 0
                                                      G
which is Lemma 4.61. It remains to show that πmρ        G
                                                          C = 0 when m|G| ≥ d and
        G
that πmρG −1 C = 0 when m|G| − 1 ≥ d. Since
                                    d 6≡ 0, −1 mod |G|,
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                61


the conditions in fact implies m|G| − 1 > d. So we are in the situation m|G| − 1 > d
                                 G            G
and we need to show that both πmρ   G
                                      C and πmρ G −1
                                                     C are zero. The exact sequence
                           G        G        G
                          πmρG
                               Y → πmρG
                                        C → πmρG −1
                                                    X
                        G
gives the vanishing of πmρG
                            C. For the remaining case consider the exact sequence
                 G           G           G           G
                πmρG −1
                        Y → πmρG −1
                                    C → πmρG −2
                                                X → πmρG −2
                                                            Y.
As above, the left group vanishes since Y is a d-slice and S mρG −1 > d. Lemma 4.63
below implies that the left vertical map in
                             G                  G
                                             / πmρ
                            πmρG −2
                                    X              −2 Y
                                                    G




                                                   
                              u              / πu
                             πmg−2 X     ≈     mg−2 Y

                                                                   G
is monomorphism, and therefore so is the top horizontal map. Thus πmρG −1
                                                                          C=0
by exactness.                                                               

Lemma 4.63. Suppose Sb is a slice cell of dimension d. If m|G| − 1 > d then the
restriction mapping
                      G
                    πmρ  G −2
                              HZ ∧ Sb → πmg−2
                                            u
                                               HZ ∧ Sb
is a monomorphism.

   Proof: When G is trivial the map is an isomorphism. By induction on |G| we
may therefore assume G is not the trivial group and that Sb is not induced, in which
case Sb = S kρG or Sb = S kρG −1 . Note that
         S mρG −2 = S (m−1)ρG −1 ∧ S ρG −1 ≥ (m − 1)|G| − 1 > (m − 2)|G|
               G
so that both πmρ G −2
                      HZ ∧S kρG and πmρ
                                     G
                                        G −2
                                             HZ ∧S kρG −1 are zero unless k = m− 1.
             G            (m−1)ρG −1
The group πmρG −2 HZ ∧ S             is zero since it is isomorphic to
                               G
                              πmρG −1
                                      HZ ∧ S (m−1)ρG
and S mρG −1 ≥ m|G| − 1 > (m − 1)|G|. This leaves the group
                        G
                       πmρG −2
                               HZ ∧ S (m−1)ρg ≈ πρGG −2 HZ
whose triviality was established in Example 3.19.                                 

4.6.3. The special case in which G is a finite 2-group. In this section we record
some results which are special to the case in which G has order a power of 2. The
results about even slices are used in the proof of the Reduction Theorem in §7.2.
The results on odd slices were used in an earlier approach to the main results of
this paper, but are no longer. We include them here because they provide useful
tools for investigating slices of various spectra. Throughout this section the group
G will be a finite 2-group.
   Suppose that X is a G-spectrum with the property that πdu X is a free abelian
group. In §5.3 we will define a refinement of πdu X to be a map
                                      c→X
                                    c:W
62                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


         c is a wedge of slice cells of dimension d, with the property that the map
in which W
  uc
πd W → πdu X is an isomorphism.
                     c → X is a refinement of π u X then the canonical map
Proposition 4.64. If W                         2k
                                         c → P 2k X
                                    HZ ∧ W    2k

is an equivalence.

   Proof: By Corollary 4.55 (and the fact that the formation of slices commutes
with the formation of wedges), the map
                                      c → HZ ∧ W
                                      W        c
induces an equivalence
                                    2k c        c.
                                   P2k W → HZ ∧ W
          2k
Applying P2k    c → X then leads to a map
             to W
                                         c → P2k
                                    HZ ∧ W    2k
                                                 X
which, since the slice tower refines the Postnikov tower, is an equivalence of under-
lying non-equivariant spectra. The result now follows from Proposition 4.62, since
the only prime dividing |G| is 2.                                                  
   Proposition 4.64 gives some control over the even slices of a G-spectrum X when
G is a 2-group. The odd slices are something of a different story, and getting at
them requires some knowledge of the equivariant homotopy type of X. Note that
by Proposition 4.50 any Mackey functor can occur in an odd slice. On the other
hand, only special ones can occur in even slices.
Corollary 4.65. If Sb is a slice cell of odd dimension d, then for any X,
                                b X]G ≈ [S,
                               [S,         b Pdd X]G .


   Proof: Since the formation of Pdd X commutes with the functors i∗H , induction
on |G| reduces us to the case when Sb is not an induced slice cell. So we may assume
Sb = S mρG −1 . Smashing Sb and X with S −mρG , and using Corollary 4.25 reduces to
the case m = 0, which is given by Proposition 4.20.                                
  The situation most of interest to us in this paper is when the odd slices are
contractible. Proposition 4.66 below gives a useful criterion.
Proposition 4.66. For a G spectrum X and an odd integer d, the following are
equivalent:
     i) The d-slice of X is contractible;
 ii) For every slice cell Sb of dimension d, [S,
                                              b X]G = 0.


     Proof: By Corollary 4.65 (which requires d to be odd), there is an isomorphism
                                   b X]G = [S,
                                  [S,       b P d X]G .
                                               d

By Lemma 4.14, the vanishing of this group implies that Pdd X < d and hence must
be contractible, since it is also ≥ d.                                        
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 63


Corollary 4.67. Suppose that d is odd. If X → Y → Z is a cofibration sequence,
and the d-slices of X and Z are contractible, then the d-slice of Y is contractible.

  Proof: This is immediate from Proposition 4.66 and the long exact sequence of
homotopy classes of maps.                                                    

Remark 4.68. Using the slice spectral sequence one can easily show that a pure
spectrum always admits a refinement of homotopy groups. Thus the results above
say that a spectrum X is pure if and only if the even homotopy groups admit an
                                                           H
equivariant refinement, and the “slice homotopy groups” πmρ  H −1
                                                                  X are all zero
whenever H ⊂ G is non-trivial.
4.7. Further multiplicative properties of the slice filtration. In this section
we show that the slice filtration has the expected multiplicative properties for pure
spectra. Our main result is Proposition 4.69 below. It has the consequence that if
X and Y are pure spectra, and Ers,t ( − ) is the slice spectral sequence, then there
is a map of spectral sequences
                                   ′   ′              ′   ′
                     Ers,t (X) ⊗ Ers ,t (Y ) → Ers+s ,t+t (X ∧ Y )
representing the pairing π ∗ X ∧ π ∗ Y → π ∗ (X ∧ Y ). In other words, multiplication
in the slice spectral sequence of pure spectra behaves in the expected manner. We
leave the deduction of this property from Proposition 4.69 to the reader.
Proposition 4.69. If X ≥ n is pure and Y ≥ m has cellular slices, then X ∧ Y ≥
n + m.

   Proof: We need to show that P n+m−1 (X ∧ Y ) is contractible. By Lemma 4.30
the map
                       X ∧ Y → P n+m−1 X ∧ P n+m−1 Y
is a P n+m−1 -equivalence, so we may reduce to the case in which the slice filtrations
of X and Y are finite. That case in turn reduces to the situation in which
                                           b
                                X = HZ ∧ S(m,    K)
                                Y = HZ ∧ Sb′
in which Sb′ is any slice cell. By induction on |G| the assertion further reduces to
the case in which neither Sb nor Sb′ is induced. Thus we may assume
                       X = HZ ∧ S kρG
                       Y = HZ ∧ S ℓρG         or HZ ∧ Σ−1 S ℓρG ,
in which case the result follows from Proposition 4.26.                             

                    5. The complex cobordism spectrum
   From here forward we specialize to the case G = C2n , and for convenience localize
all spectra at the prime 2. Write
                                           g = |G|,
and let γ ∈ G be a fixed generator.
64                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


5.1. The spectrum M U ((G)) . We now introduce our equivariant variation on the
complex cobordism spectrum by defining
                                M U ((G)) = NCG2 M UR ,
where M UR is the C2 -equivariant real bordism spectrum of Landweber [43] and
Fujii [24] (and further studied by Araki [6] and Hu-Kriz [35]). In §B.12 we will give
a construction of M UR as a commutative algebra in SC2 . The norm is taken along
the unique inclusion C2 ⊂ G. Since the norm is symmetric monoidal, and its left
derived functor may be computed on the spectra underlying cofibrant commutative
rings (Proposition B.147), the spectrum M U ((G)) is an equivariant commutative ring
spectrum. For H ⊂ G the unit of the restriction-norm adjunction (Proposition 2.27)
gives a canonical commutative algebra map
(5.1)                          M U ((H)) → i∗H M U ((G)) .
   By analogy with the shorthand i∗0 for restriction along the inclusion of the trivial
group, we will employ the shorthand notation
                                        i∗1 = i∗C2
for the restriction map SG → SC2 induced by the unique inclusion C2 ⊂ G. Re-
stricting, one has a C2 -equivariant smash product decomposition
                                               g/2−1
                                                ^
(5.2)                        i∗1 M U ((G)) =           γ j M UR .
                                               j=0

5.2. Real bordism, real orientations and formal groups. We begin by re-
viewing work of Araki [6] and Hu-Kriz [35] on real bordism.
5.2.1. The formal group. Consider CPn and CP∞ as pointed C2 -spaces under the
action of complex conjugation, with CP0 as the base point. The fixed point spaces
are RPn and RP∞ . There are homeomorphisms
(5.3)                           CPn /CPn−1 ≡ S nρ2 ,
and in particular an identification CP1 ≡ S ρ2 .
Definition 5.4 (Araki [6]). Let E be a C2 -equivariant homotopy commutative ring
                                                    ρ2
spectrum. A real orientation of E is a class x̄ ∈ ẼC 2
                                                        (CP∞ ) whose restriction to
                           ρ2             ρ2
                         ẼC 2
                               (CP1 ) = ẼC 2
                                                         0
                                              (S ρ2 ) ≈ EC 2
                                                             (pt)
is the unit. A real oriented spectrum is a C2 -equivariant ring spectrum E equipped
with a real orientation.
    If (E, x̄) is a real oriented spectrum and f : E → E ′ is an equivariant multiplica-
tive map, then
                                    f∗ (x̄) ∈ (E ′ )ρ2 (CP∞ )
is a real orientation of E ′ . We will often not distinguish in notation between x̄ and
f∗ x̄.
Example 5.5. The zero section CP∞ → M U (1) is an equivariant equivalence, and
defines a real orientation
                               x̄ ∈ M URρ2 (CP∞ ),
making M UR into a real oriented spectrum.
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              65


Example 5.6. From the map
                                  M UR → i∗1 M U ((G))
provided by (5.1), the spectrum i∗1 M U ((G)) gets a real orientation which we’ll also
denote
                             x̄ ∈ (M U ((G)) )ρ2 (CP∞ ).
Example 5.7. If (H, x̄H ) and (E, x̄E ) are two real oriented spectra then H ∧ E has
two real orientations given by
                           x̄H = x̄H ⊗ 1 and x̄E = 1 ⊗ x̄E .
  The following result of Araki follows easily from the homeomorphisms (5.3).
Theorem 5.8 (Araki [6]). Let E be a real oriented cohomology theory. There are
isomorphisms
                                 E ⋆ (CP∞ ) ≈ E ⋆ [[x̄]]
                       E ⋆ (CP∞ × CP∞ ) ≈ E ⋆ [[x̄ ⊗ 1, 1 ⊗ x̄]]


   Because of Theorem 5.8, the map CP∞ × CP∞ → CP∞ classifying the tensor
product of the two tautological line bundles defines a formal group law over π⋆G E.
Using this, much of the theory relating formal groups, complex cobordism, and
complex oriented cohomology theories works for C2 -equivariant spectra, with M UR
playing the role of M U . For information beyond the discussion below, see [6, 35].
Remark 5.9. A real orientation x̄ corresponds to a coordinate on the corresponding
formal group. Because of this we will use the terms interchangeably, preferring
“coordinate” when the discussion predominantly concerns the formal group, and
“real orientation” when it concerns spectra.
   The standard formulae from the theory of formal groups give elements in the
RO(C2 )-graded homotopy groups π⋆C2 E of real oriented E. For example, there is a
map from the Lazard ring to π⋆C2 E classifying the formal group law. Using Quillen’s
theorem to identify the Lazard ring with the complex cobordism ring this map can
be written as
                                  M U∗ → π⋆C2 E.
                    C2
It sends M U2n to πnρ 2
                        E. When E = M UR this splits the forgetful map
                           C2          u
(5.10)                    πnρ2
                               M UR → π2n M UR = π2n M U,
which is therefore surjective. A similar discussion applies to iterated smash products
of M UR giving
Proposition 5.11. For every m > 0, the above construction gives a ring homo-
morphism
                          m
                          ^        M        m
                                            ^
                                        C2
(5.12)                π∗u   M UR →     πjρ2
                                              M UR
                                               j

splitting the forgetful map
                           M      m
                                  ^             m
                                                ^
                              C2              u
(5.13)                       πjρ2
                                    M U R → π∗    M UR .
                            j

In particular, (5.13) is a split surjection.                                        
66                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  It is a result of Hu-Kriz[35] that (5.13) is in fact an isomorphism. This result,
and a generalization to M U ((G)) can be recovered from the slice spectral sequence.
  The class
                                    x̄H ∈ HCρ22 (CP∞ ; Z(2) )
corresponding to 1 ∈ HC0 2 (pt, Z(2) ) under the isomorphism

                   HCρ22 (CP∞ ; Z(2) ) ≈ HCρ22 (CP2 ; Z(2) ) ≈ HC0 2 (pt, Z(2) )
defines a real orientation of HZ(2) . As in Example 5.7, the classes x̄ and x̄H give
two orientations of E = HZ(2) ∧ M UR . By Theorem 5.8 these are related by a
power series
                                    x̄H = logF (x̄)
                                               X
                                        = x̄ +      m̄i x̄i+1 ,
                                                 i>0

with
                                          C2
                                   m̄i ∈ πiρ2
                                              HZ(2) ∧ M UR .
This power series is the logarithm of F . Similarly, the invariant differential on F
                            C2
gives classes (n + 1)m̄n ∈ πnρ2
                                M UR . The coefficients of the formal sum give
                                            C2
                                    āij ∈ π(i+j−1)ρ2
                                                      M UR .

Remark 5.14. Since the generator of C2 acts by (−1)n on
                                H2n i∗0 S nρ2 = π2n
                                                 u
                                                    HZ ∧ S nρ2 ,
                        n
it acts also acts
               Vmby (−1) on the
                             Vm non-equivariant class mn underlying m̄n and by
     n      u
(−1) on π2n       M UR = π2n    MU.
     If (E, x̄E ) is a real oriented spectrum then E ∧ M UR has two orientations
                                          x̄E = x̄E ⊗ 1
                                          x̄R = 1 ⊗ x̄.
These two orientations are related by a power series
                                       X
(5.15)                           x̄R =    b̄i xi+1
                                               E

defining classes
                                                C2
                                   b̄i = b̄E
                                           i ∈ πiρ2 E ∧ M UR .

The power series (5.15) is an isomorphism over π⋆C2 E ∧ M UR
                                            FE → FR
of the formal group law for (E, x̄E ) with the formal group law for (M UR , x̄).
Theorem 5.16 (Araki [6]). The map
                               E⋆ [b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ] → π⋆C2 E ∧ M UR
is an isomorphism.                                                                 
                                     KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                         67


   Araki’s theorem has an evident geometric counterpart. For each j choose a map

                                           S jρ2 → E ∧ M UR

representing b̄j . As in §2.4, let
                                                         _
                                           S[b̄j ] =           S k·jρ2
                                                         k≥0

be the free associative algebra on S jρ2 and

                                           S[b̄j ] → E ∧ M UR

the homotopy associative algebra map extending (5.39). Using the multiplication
map, smash these together to form a map of spectra

(5.17)                            E[b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ] → E ∧ M U ((G)) ,

where
                  E[b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ] = E ∧ holim S[b̄1 ] ∧ S[b̄2 ] ∧ · · · ∧ S[b̄k ].
                                                −→
                                                     k

The map on RO(C2 )-graded homotopy groups induced by (5.17) is the isomorphism
of Araki’s theorem. This proves

Corollary 5.18. If E is a real oriented spectrum then there is a weak equivalence

                                     E ∧ M UR ≈ E[b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ].

                                                                                                    

Remark 5.19. If E is strictly associative then (5.17) is a map of associative algebras,
and the above identifies E ∧ M UR as a twisted monoid ring over E.

   As in §2.4, write

                  S 0 [b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ] = holim S 0 [b̄1 ] ∧ S 0 [b̄2 ] ∧ · · · ∧ S 0 [b̄k ],
                                               −→
                                                k

and
                         S 0 [G · b̄1 , G · b̄1 , . . . ] = NCG2 S 0 [b̄1 , b̄2 , . . . ].
Using Proposition 4.7 one can easily check that S 0 [G · b̄1 , G · b̄2 , . . . ] is a wedge of
isotropic regular slice cells. Finally, let

             M U ((G))[G · b̄1 , G · b̄2 , . . . ] = M U ((G)) ∧ S 0 [G · b̄1 , G · b̄1 , . . . ]

Corollary 5.20. For H ⊂ G of index 2, there is an equivalence of H-equivariant
associative algebras

                          i∗H M U ((G)) ≈ M U ((H)) [H · b̄1 , H · b̄2 , . . . ].


   Proof: Apply NCH2 to the decomposition of Corollary 5.18 with E = M UR .                         
68                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


5.2.2. The unoriented cobordism ring. Passing to geometric fixed points from
                                 x̄ : CP∞ → Σρ2 M UR
gives the canonical inclusion
                           a : RP∞ = M O(1) → ΣM O,
defining the M O Euler class of the tautological line bundle. There are isomorphisms
                             M O∗ (RP∞ ) ≈ M O∗ [[a]]
                    M O∗ (RP∞ × RP∞ ) ≈ M O∗ [[a ⊗ 1, 1 ⊗ a]]
and the multiplication map RP∞ × RP∞ → RP∞ gives a formal group law over
M O∗ . By Quillen [67], it is the universal formal group law F over a ring of char-
acteristic 2 for which F (a, a) = 0.
   As described by Quillen [69, Page 53], the formal group can be used to give
convenient generators for the unoriented cobordism ring. Let
                                  e ∈ H 1 (RP∞ ; Z/2)
be the HZ/2 Euler class of the tautological line bundle. Over π∗ HZ/2 ∧ M O there
is a power series relating e and the image of the class a
                                            X
                             e = ℓ(a) = a +     αn an+1 .
Lemma 5.21. The composite series
                   X           j                 X
(5.22)        (a +    α2j −1 a2 )−1 ◦ ℓ(a) = a +   hj aj+1
                                                        j>0

has coefficients in π∗ M O. The classes hj with j + 1 = 2k are zero. The remaining
hj are polynomial generators for the unoriented cobordism ring
(5.23)                     π∗ M O = Z/2[hj , j 6= 2k − 1].

   Proof: The assertion that hj = 0 for j + 1 = 2k is straightforward. Since the
sequence
(5.24)         π∗ M O → π∗ HZ/2 ∧ M O ⇒ π∗ HZ/2 ∧ HZ/2 ∧ M O
is a split equalizer, to show that the remaining hj are in π∗ M O it suffices to show
that they are equalized by the parallel maps in (5.24). This works out to showing
that the series (5.22) is invariant under substitutions of the form
                                           X       m
(5.25)                            e 7→ e +   ζm e2 ,
The series (5.22) is characterized as the unique isomorphism of the formal group
law for unoriented cobordism with the additive group, having the additional prop-
                                 k
erty that the coefficients of a2 are zero. This condition is stable under the
substitutions (5.25). The last assertion follows from Quillen’s characterization of
π∗ M O.                                                                          

Remark 5.26. Recall the real orientation x̄ of i∗1 M U ((G)) of Example 5.6. Applying
the RO(G)-graded cohomology norm (§2.3.3) to x̄, and then passing to geometric
fixed points, gives a class
                                ΦG N (x̄) ∈ M O1 (RP∞ ).
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               69


One can easily check that ΦG N (x̄) coincides with the M O Euler class a defined at
the beginning of this section. Similarly one has
                                   ΦG N (x̄H ) = e.
Applying ΦG N to logF̄ and using the fact that it is a ring homomorphism (Propo-
sition 2.59) gives                X
                          e=a+        ΦG N (m̄k )ak+1 .
It follows that
                                  ΦG N (m̄k ) = αk .
5.3. Refinement of homotopy groups. We begin by focusing on a simple con-
sequence of Proposition 5.11.
Proposition 5.27. For every m > 1, every element of
                                    m
                                           !
                                    ^
                              π2k     MU

can be refined to an equivariant map
                                            m
                                            ^
                                  S kρ2 →       M UR .
                                                                                  
   This result expresses an important property of the C2 -spectra given by iterated
smash products of M UR . Our goal in this section is to formulate a generalization
to the case G = C2n .
Definition 5.28. Suppose X is a G-spectrum. A refinement of πku X is a map
                                        c→X
                                      c:W
         c is a wedge of slice cells of dimension k, inducing an isomorphism
in which W
                                      c → π u X.
                                   πu W
                                      k         k
A refinement of the homotopy groups of X (or a refinement of homotopy of X) is a
map                                 _
                               c=
                               W       ck → X
                                       W
                          ck is a refinement of π u .
whose restriction to each W                      k

Remark 5.29. Let σG (Z) be the sign representation of G on Z. There is an G-
                     u
module isomorphism π|G| S ρG ≈ σG (Z), and more generally
                                       
                       u
                     πn|H|  G+ ∧ S nρH ≈ indGH σH (Z)
                                                      ⊗n
                                                         .
                                  H
This implies that when k is even, a necessary condition for πku X to admit a refine-
ment is that it be isomorphic as a G-module to a sum
                                     M
                                         MH,k
                                      H⊂G
                                                                                   
where MH,k is zero unless |H| divides k and is a sum of copies of indG  H σH (Z)
                                                                                ⊗ℓ

when k = ℓ|H|. Adding the further condition that for every H ⊂ G, with k = ℓ|H|,
every element in πku X transforming in σH (Z)⊗ℓ refines to an element of πℓρ  H
                                                                                H
                                                                                  X
makes it sufficient. A similar analysis describes the case in which k is odd.
70                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Remark 5.30. Using Remark 5.29 one can check that a refinement of πku X consists
of isotropic slice cells if and only if πku X does not contain a free G-module as a
summand.
  The splitting (5.12) used to prove Proposition 5.27 is multiplicative. This too
has an important analogue.
Definition 5.31. Suppose that R is an equivariant associative algebra. A mul-
                                                                 c → R which,
tiplicative refinement of homotopy is an associative algebra map W
when regarded as a map of G-spectra is a refinement of homotopy.
Proposition 5.32. For every m ≥ 1 there exists a multiplicative refinement of
homotopy
                                ^m
                            c→
                            W      M U ((G)),
     c a wedge of regular isotropic slice cells.
with W
   Two ingredients form the proof of Proposition 5.32. The first, Lemma 5.33 below,
is a description of π∗u M U ((G)) as a G-module. The computation is of interest in its
own right, and is used elsewhere              paper. It is proved in §5.4. The second is
                                   Vmin this((G))
the classical description of π∗u (     MU         ), m > 1, as a π∗u M U ((G)) -module.
                                                  u
Lemma 5.33. There is a sequence of elements ri ∈ π2i M U ((G)) with the property
that
(5.34)                   π∗u M U ((G)) = Z2 [G · r1 , G · r2 , . . . ],
in which G · ri stands for the sequence
                                                   g
                                      (ri , . . . γ 2 −1 ri )
of length g/2.
                                                                      u
   We refer to the condition (5.34) by saying that the elements ri ∈ π2i M U ((G))
                                        u     ((G))
form a set of G-algebra generators for π∗ M U       .
Remark 5.35. Lemma 5.33 completely describes π∗u M U ((G)) as a representation of
G. To spell it out, recall from Remark 5.14 that the action of the generator of C2
                                                                                   g
    u
on π2i M U ((G)) is by (−1)i . The elements ri ∈ π2i
                                                  u
                                                     M U ((G)) therefore satisfy γ 2 ri =
(−1)i ri and transform in the representation induced from the sign representation
of C2 if i is odd and in the representation induced from the trivial representation
of C2 if i is even. Lemma 5.33 implies that the map from the symmetric algebras
on the sum of these representations to π∗u M U ((G)) is an isomorphism.
                                                    u
Remark 5.36. The fact that the action of C2 on π2i    M U ((G)) is either a sum of sign
or trivial representations means that it cannot contain a summand which is free.
The same is therefore true of the G-action. By Remark 5.30 this implies that only
                                                    u
isotropic slice cells may occur in a refinement of π2i M U ((G)).
   Over π∗u M U ((G)) ∧ M U ((G)), there are two formal group laws, FL and FR coming
from the canonical orientations of the left and right factors. There is also a canonical
isomorphism between them, which can be written as
                                           X
                                     xR =      bj xj+1
                                                   L .

Write
                                             G · bi
                                    KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                           71


for the sequence
                                        bi , γbi , . . . , γ g/2−1 bi .
   The following result is a standard computation in complex cobordism.
Lemma 5.37. The ring π∗u M U ((G)) ∧ M U ((G)) is given by
                 π∗u M U ((G)) ∧ M U ((G)) = π∗u M U ((G)) [G · b1 , G · b2 , . . . ].
For m > 1,
                              m
                              ^                                       m−1
                                                                      ^
                        π∗u       M U ((G)) = π∗u M U ((G)) ∧               M U ((G))
is the polynomial ring
                                                                (j)
                                        π∗u M U ((G)) [G · bi ],
with
                                         i = 1, 2, . . . ,      and
                                         j = 1, . . . , m − 1.
               (j)                                                                       Vm−1
The element bi       is the class bi arising from the j th factor of M U ((G)) in               M U ((G)).

   Proof: The second assertion follows from the first and the Künneth formula. If
not for the fact that G acts on both factors of i∗0 M U ((G)), the first assertion would
also follow immediately from the Künneth formula and the usual description of
M U∗ M U . The quickest way to deduce it from the apparatus we have describe so
far is to let G ⊂ G′ be an embedding of index 2 into a cyclic group, write
                                                                             ′
                              M U ((G)) ∧ M U ((G)) ≈ i∗G M U ((G ))
and use Corollary 5.20.                                                                              

Remark 5.38. As with Lemma 5.33, the lemma above actually determines the
structure of π∗u M U ((G)) ∧ M U ((G)) as a G-equivariant π∗u M U ((G))-algebra. See Re-
mark 5.35.

   Proof of Proposition 5.32, assuming Lemma 5.33: This is a straightforward
application of the method of twisted monoid rings of §2.4. To keep the notation
                                                             u
simple we begin with the case m = 1. Choose a sequence ri ∈ π2i M U ((G)) with the
property described in Lemma 5.33. Let
(5.39)                                 r̄i : S iρ2 → i∗1 M U ((G)),
be a representative of the image of ri under the splitting (5.12). Since M U ((G)) is a
commutative algebra, the method of twisted monoid rings can be used to construct
an associative algebra map
(5.40)                        S 0 [G · r̄1 , G · r̄2 , . . . ] → M U ((G)),
Using Proposition 4.7 one can easily check that S 0 [G · r̄1 , G · r̄2 , . . . ] is a wedge of
regular isotropic G-slice cells. Using Lemma 5.33 one then easily checks that (5.40)
is multiplicative refinement of homotopy. The case m ≥ 1 is similar, using in
addition Lemma 5.37 and the collection {ri , bi (j)}.                                       
72                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


5.4. Algebra generators for π∗u M U ((G)). In this section we will describe con-
venient algebra generators for π∗u M U ((G)) . Our main results are Proposition 5.45
(giving a criterion for a sequence of elements ri to “generate” π∗u M U ((G)) as a G-
algebra, as in Lemma 5.33) and Corollary 5.49 (specifying a particular sequence of
ri ). Proposition 5.45 directly gives Lemma 5.33.
    We remind the reader that the notation H∗u X refers to the homology groups
H∗ (i∗0 X) of the non-equivariant spectrum underlying X.

5.4.1. A criterion for a generating set. Let
                                           u
                           mi ∈ H2i M U = π2i HZ ∧ M UR
be the coefficient of the universal logarithm. Using the identification (5.2)
                                                  g/2−1
                                                   ^
                                i∗1 M U ((G)) =           γ j M UR
                                                  j=0

and the Künneth formula, one has
                                H∗u M U ((G)) = Z(2) [γ j mk ],

where

                                        k = 1, 2, . . . ,
                                    j = 0, . . . , g/2 − 1.
By the definition of the γ j mk and Remark 5.14, the action of G on H∗u M U ((G)) is
given by
                                 (
                          j        γ j+1 mk       j < g/2 − 1
(5.41)               γ · γ mk =
                                   (−1)k mk       j = g/2 − 1 .
     Let
                                I = ker π∗u M U ((G)) → Z(2)
                            IH = ker H∗u M U ((G)) → Z(2)
denote the augmentation ideals, and
                                         Q∗ = I/I 2
                                                  2
                                       QH∗ = IH /IH
the modules of indecomposable, with Q2m and QH2m indicating the homogeneous
parts of degree 2m (the odd degree parts are zero). The module QH∗ is the free abe-
lian group with basis {γ j mk }, and from Milnor [65], one knows that the Hurewicz
homomorphism gives an isomorphism
                                       Q2k → QH2k
                            ℓ
if 2k is not of the form 2(2 − 1), and an exact sequence
(5.42)                     Q2(2ℓ −1) ֌ QH2(2ℓ −1) ։ Z/2
in which the rightmost map is the one sending each γ j mk to 1.
   Formula (5.41) implies that the G-module QH2k is the module induced from the
sign representation of C2 if k is odd and from the trivial representation if k is even.
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              73

                           P
Lemma 5.43. Let r =            aj γ j mk ∈ QH2k . The unique G-module map
                                        Z(2) [G] → QH2k
                                               1 7→ r
factors through a map
                       Z(2) [G]/(γ g/2 − (−1)k ) → QH2k
                                       P
which is an isomorphism if and only if    aj ≡ 1 mod 2.

   Proof: The factorization is clear, since γ g/2 acts with eigenvalue (−1)k on QH2k .
Use the unique map Z(2) [G] → QH2k sending 1 to mk to identify QH2k with A =
                                                                          P
Z(2) [G]/(γ g/2 −(−1)k ). The
                            P main assertion is then that an element r = aj γ ∈ A
                                                                                 j

is a unit if and only if       aj ≡ 1 mod 2. Since A is a finitely generated free
module over the Noetherian local ring Z(2) , Nakayama’s lemma implies that the
map A → A given by multiplication by r is an isomorphism if and only if it is after
reduction modulo 2. So r is a unit if and only if it is after reduction modulo 2. But
A/(2) = Z/2[γ]/(γ g/2 − 1) is a local ring with nilpotent maximal ideal (γ − 1). The
residue map
                              A/(2) → A/(2, γ − 1) = Z/2
       P      j
                     P
sends     aj γ mk to     aj . The result follows.                                  

Lemma 5.44. The G-module Q2(2ℓ −1) is isomorphic to the module induced from
the sign representation of C2 . For y ∈ QH2(2ℓ −1) , the unique G-map
                                   Z(2) [G] → QH2(2ℓ −1)
                                           1 7→ y
factors through a map
                           A = Z(2) [G]/(γ g/2 + 1) → Q2(2ℓ −1)
which is an isomorphism
              P         if and only if y = (1 − γ)r where r ∈ QH2(2ℓ −1) satisfies
the condition   aj = 1 mod 2 of Lemma 5.43.

   Proof: Identify QH2(2ℓ −1) with A by the map sending 1 to m2ℓ −1 . In this case
A is isomorphic to Z(2) [ζ], with ζ a primitive g th root of unity, and in particular
is an integral domain. Under this identification, the rightmost map in (5.42) is the
quotient of A by the principal ideal (ζ − 1). Since A is an integral domain, this
ideal is a rank 1 free module generated by any element of the form (1 − γ)r with
r ∈ A a unit. The result follows.                                                  
   This discussion proves
Proposition 5.45. Let
                            {r1 , r2 , . . . } ⊂ π∗u M U ((G))
be any sequence of elements whose images
                                    sk ∈ QH2k
                                           P
have the property that for k 6= 2 − 1, sk = aj γ j mk with
                                    ℓ
                                 X
                                    aj ≡ 1 mod 2,
74                        M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL

                             P                
and s2ℓ −1 = (1 − γ)             aj γ j m2ℓ −1 , with
                                          X
                                               aj ≡ 1 mod 2.
Then the sequence
                                              g                     g
                        {r1 , . . . γ 2 −1 r1 , r2 , . . . , γ 2 −1 r2 , . . . }
generates the ideal I, and so
                                      g                     g
                    Z(2) [r1 , . . . γ 2 −1 r1 , r2 , . . . , γ 2 −1 r2 , . . . ] → π∗u M U ((G))
is an isomorphism.                                                                                  
5.4.2. Specific generators. We now use the action of G on i∗1 M U ((G)) to define spe-
                      C2
cific elements r̄i ∈ πiρ2
                          M U ((G)) refining a sequence satisfying the condition of Propo-
sition 5.45.
    Write
                                            F̄ (x̄, ȳ)
                                     C2
for the formal group law over π⋆ M U ((G)), and
                                                    X
                                logF̄ (x̄) = x̄ +       m̄k x̄k+1
                                                             i>0
for its logarithm. This defines elements
                                             C2
                                      m̄k ∈ πkρ2
                                                 HZ(2) ∧ M U ((G)).
We define the elements
                                                     C2
(5.46)                                        r̄k ∈ πkρ2
                                                         M U ((G))
to be the coefficients of the unique strict isomorphism of F̄ with the 2-typification
of F̄ γ . The Hurewicz images
                                                 C2
                                          r̄k ∈ πkρ2
                                                     HZ(2) ∧ M U ((G))
are given by the power series identity
                 X                  X                
                                                     ℓ −1
(5.47)              r̄k x̄k+1 = x̄ +   γ(m̄2ℓ −1 )x̄2     ◦ logF̄ (x̄).
Modulo decomposables this becomes
                           (
                             m̄k − γ m̄k                            k = 2ℓ − 1
(5.48)               r̄k ≡
                             m̄k                                    otherwise.
This shows that the elements r̄k satisfy the condition of Proposition 5.45, hence
Corollary 5.49. The classes rk = i∗0 r̄k form a set of G-algebra generators for
π∗u M U ((G)) .                                                              
   These are the specific generators with which we shall work. Though it does not
appear in the notation, the classes r̄i depend on the group G. In §9 we will need
to consider the classes r̄i for a group G and for a subgroup H ⊂ G. We will then
use the notation
                                      r̄iH and r̄iG
to distinguish them.
   The following result establishes an important property of these specific r̄k . In the
statement below, the symbol N is the norm map on the RO(G)-graded homotopy
groups of commutative rings.
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            75


Proposition 5.50. For all k
                               ΦG N (r̄k ) = hk ∈ πk M O,
where the hk are the classes defined in §5.2.2. In particular, the set
                                 {ΦG N (r¯k ) | k 6= 2ℓ − 1}
is a set of polynomial algebra generators of π∗ M O, and for all ℓ
                               ΦG N (r̄2ℓ −1 ) = h2ℓ −1 = 0.


  Proof: From Remark 5.26 we know that
                                        ΦG N x̄ = a
                                      ΦG N x̄H = e
                                      ΦG N m̄n = αn .
Corollary 2.29 implies that
                                 ΦG N γ m̄n = ΦG N m̄n ,
so we also know that
                                      ΦG N γ m̄n = αn .
Since the Hurewicz homomorphism

                    π∗ ΦG M U ((G))        / π∗ ΦG (HZ(2) ∧ M U ((G)))

                         ≈                                 ≈
                                                        
                        π∗ M O                 / π∗ HZ/2[b] ∧ M O

is a monomorphism, we can calculate ΦG N r̄k using (5.47). Applying ΦG N to (5.47),
and using the fact that it is a ring homomorphism gives
            X
         a+     (ΦG N r̄k )ak+1
                    X                       
                                            ℓ −1
                                                       X                  
             = a+        (ΦG N γ m̄2ℓ −1 )a2     ◦ a+      (ΦG N m̄k )ak+1
                    X              
                                   ℓ −1
                                              X          
             = a+         α2ℓ −1 a2     ◦ a+       αk ak+1 .

But this is the identity defining the classes hk .                               
  In addition to
                      hk = ΦG N (r̄k ) ∈ πk ΦG M U ((G)) = πk M O
there are some important classes fk attached to these specific r̄k .
Definition 5.51. Set
                              fk = akρ̄G N r̄k ∈ πkG M U ((G)),
where ρ̄G = ρG − 1 is the reduced regular representation.
76                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The relationship between these classes is displayed in the following commutative
diagram.
                                            S k ❖❖ h
                               ak
                                ρ̄      ttt        ❖❖❖k
                                                       ❖❖❖
                                G t
                                 t t           fk          ❖❖❖
                                t
                             zttN r̄                         '
                                     k
                       S kρG           / M U ((G))        / ẼP ∧ M U ((G))

             6. The Slice Theorem and the Reduction Theorem
   Using the method of twisted monoid rings one can show the Slice Theorem and
the Reduction Theorem to be equivalent. In §6.1 we formally state the Reduction
Theorem, and assuming it, prove the Slice Theorem. In §6.2 we establish a con-
verse, for associative algebras R which are pure and which admit a multiplicative
refinement of homotopy by a polynomial algebra. Both assertions are used in the
proof of the Reduction Theorem in §7.
6.1. From the Reduction Theorem to the Slice Theorem. We now state the
Slice Theorem, using the language of §4.6.2.
Theorem 6.1 (Slice Theorem). The spectrum M U ((G)) is an isotropic pure spec-
trum.
     For the proof of the slice theorem, let
                          A = S 0 [G · r̄1 , G · r̄2 , . . . ] → M U ((G))
be the multiplicative refinement of homotopy constructed in §5.3 using the method
of twisted monoid rings, and the specific generators of §5.4.2. Let J be the left
G-set defined by                       a
                                   J=     G/C2 .
                                                i
As described in §2.4, the spectrum A is the indexed wedge
                                        _
                                  A=        S ρf ,
                                               f ∈NJ
                                                   0

in which ρf is the unique multiple of the regular representation of the stabilizer
group of f having dimension
                                        X
                             dim f = 2      j f (j).
                                                    j∈J

As in Example 2.33, let
                                     Md ⊂ A
be the monomial ideal consisting of the indexed wedge of the S ρf with dim f ≥ d.
Then M2d−1 = M2d , and the M2d fit into a sequence
                        · · · ֒→ M2d+2 ֒→ M2d ֒→ M2d−2 ֒→ · · · .
The quotient
                                          M2d /M2d+2
is the indexed wedge
                                                    _
(6.2)                                c2d =
                                     W                     S ρf
                                               dim f =2d
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            77


on which A is acting through the multiplicative map A → S 0 (Examples 2.33
and A.49). The G-spectrum (6.2) is a wedge of regular isotropic slice cells of
dimension 2d.
  Replace M U ((G)) with a cofibrant A-module, and form
                                K2d = M U ((G)) ∧ M2d .
                                                 A

The K2d fit into a sequence
                                 K2d+2 ֒→ K2d ֒→ · · · .
Lemma 6.3. The sequences
                             K2d+2 → K2d → K2d /K2d+2
                    K2d /K2d+2 → M U ((G))/K2d+2 → M U ((G)) /K2d
are weakly equivalent to cofibration sequences. There is an equivalence

(6.4)                                             c2d
                              K2d /K2d+2 ≈ R(∞) ∧ W
in which
                                R(∞) = M U ((G)) ∧ S 0 .
                                                     A



   Proof: Since the map K2d+2 → K2d is the inclusion of a wedge summand it is an
h-cofibration of spectra, and the first assertion follows from Proposition B.20 and
Corollary B.140. The second assertion follows from the associativity of the smash
product
                                                            c2d ≈ R(∞) ∧ W
           M U ((G)) ∧ (M2d /M2d+1 ) ≈ (M U ((G)) ∧ S 0 ) ∧ W            c2d .
                   A                            A

This completes the proof.                                                        
  The Thom map
                                   M U ((G)) → HZ(2)
factors uniquely through an M U ((G))-module map
                                    R(∞) → HZ(2) .
The following important result will be proved in §7.3.
Theorem 6.5 (The Reduction Theorem). The map
                                    R(∞) → HZ(2)
is a weak equivalence.
   The case G = C2 of the Reduction Theorem is Proposition 4.9 of Hu-Kriz[35].
Its analogue in motivic homotopy theory appears in unpublished work of the second
author and Morel.
   To deduce the Slice Theorem from Theorem 6.5 we need two simple lemmas.
Lemma 6.6. The spectrum K2d+2 is slice 2d-positive.
78                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


     Proof: The class of left A-modules M for which M ∧ M2d+2 > 2d is closed
                                                                    A
under homotopy colimits and extensions. It contains every module of the form
Σk G/H+ ∧ A, with k ≥ 0. Since A is (−1)-connected this means it contains
every (−1)-connected cofibrant A-module. In particular it contains the cofibrant
replacement of M U ((G)).                                                     

Lemma 6.7. If Theorem 6.5 holds then M U ((G))/K2d+2 ≤ 2d.


     Proof: This is easily proved by induction on d, using the fact that
                          c2d → M U ((G))/K2d+2 → M U ((G))/K2d .
                   R(∞) ∧ W
is weakly equivalent to a cofibration sequence (Lemma 6.3).                          


   Proof of the Slice Theorem assuming the Reduction Theorem: It follows from the
fibration sequence
                        K2d+2 → M U ((G)) → M U ((G))/K2d+2 ,
Lemmas 6.6 and 6.7 above, and Lemma 4.16 that
                   P 2d+1 M U ((G)) ≈ P 2d M U ((G)) ≈ M U ((G))/K2d+2 .
Thus the odd slices of M U ((G)) are contractible and the 2d-slice is weakly equivalent
to
                            R(∞) ∧ W  c2d ≈ HZ ∧ W    c2d .
                                                 (2)
This completes the proof.                                                            

6.2. A converse. The arguments of the previous section can be reversed. Suppose
that R is a (−1)-connected associative algebra which we know in advance to be pure,
and that A → R is a multiplicative refinement of homotopy, with
                                   A = S 0 [G · x̄1 , . . . ]
a twisted monoid ring having the property that |x̄i | > 0 for all i. Note that this
implies that π0u R = Z and that P00 R = HZ. Let Md+1 ⊂ A be the monomial ideal
consisting of the slice cells in A of dimension > d, write
                                  P̃d+1 R = Md+1 ∧ R
                                                        A

and
                          P̃ d R = R/P̃d+1 R ≈ (A/Md+1 ) ∧ R.
                                                                A
              d
Then the P̃ R form a tower. Since Md+1 > d and R ≥ 0 (Proposition 4.20), the
spectrum P̃d+1 R is slice d-positive. There is therefore a map
(6.8)                                 P̃ d R → P d R,
compatible with variation in d.
Proposition 6.9. The map (6.8) is a weak equivalence. The tower {P̃ d R} is the
slice tower for R.
                                   KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               79


  By analogy with the slice tower, write P̃dd′ R for the homotopy fiber of the map
                                                     ′
                                        P̃ d R → P̃ d −1 R,
when d′ ≤ d.
  We start with a lemma concerning the case d = 0.
Lemma 6.10. Let n ≥ 0. If the map
                                          P̃ 0 R → P 0 R
becomes an equivalence after applying P n , then for every d ≥ 0 the map
                                          P̃dd R → Pdd R
becomes an equivalence after applying P d+n .

               cd = Md /Md+1 . Then there are equivalences
  Proof: Write W
                           cd ∧ R ≈ W
                  P̃dd R ≈ W        cd ∧ (S 0 ∧ R) ≈ W
                                                     cd ∧ P̃00 R.
                                   A                       A
Since A → R is a refinement of homotopy and R is pure, the analogous map
                                       cd ∧ P 0 R → P d R
                                       W     0       d

is also a weak equivalence. Now consider the following diagram
                                                 ∼
                       cd ∧ P n (P̃00 R)
                       W                                  c ∧ P n (P 0 R)
                                                         /W
                                                               d            0


                                                               
                           cd ∧ P̃ 0 R)
                    P d+n (W                                  c ∧ P 0 R)
                                                     / P d+n (W
                                                                    d
                                  0                                             0

                               ∼                                        ∼
                                                                   
                        P d+n (P̃dd R)                     / P d+n (P d R)
                                                                      d

The top map is an equivalence by assumption. The bottom vertical maps are the
result of applying P d+n to the weak equivalences just described. Since W  cd is a
wedge of regular slice cells of dimension d, Corollary 4.25 implies that the upper
vertical maps are weak equivalences. It follows that the bottom horizontal map is
a weak equivalence as well.                                                     

  Proof of Proposition 6.9: We will show by induction on k that for all d, the map
                               P d+k (P̃ d R) → P d+k (P d R)
is a weak equivalence. By the strong convergence of the slice tower (Theorem 4.42)
this will give the result. The induction starts with k = 0 since P̃d+1 R > d and so
R → P̃ d R is a P d -equivalence. For the induction step, suppose we know the result
for some k > 0, and consider

                P d+k P̃dd R            / P d+k (P̃ d R)           / P d+k (P̃ d−1 R)

                   ∼                         ∼
                                                                           
               P d+k (Pdd R)            / P d+k (P d R)            / P d+k (P d−1 R)
80                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


The bottom row is a cofibration sequence since it can be identified with
                                 Pdd R → P d R → P d−1 R.
The middle vertical map is a weak equivalence by the induction hypothesis, and the
left vertical map is a weak equivalence by the induction hypothesis and Lemma 6.10.
It follows that the cofiber of the upper left map is weakly equivalent to P d+k (P d−1 R)
and hence is (d + k + 1)-slice null (in fact d slice null). The top row is therefore a
cofibration sequence by Corollary 4.17, and so the rightmost vertical map is a weak
equivalence. This completes the inductive step, and the proof.                         

                           7. The Reduction Theorem
   We will prove the Reduction Theorem by induction on g = |G|. The case in which
G is the trivial group follows from Quillen’s results. We may therefore assume that
we are working with a non-trivial group G and that the Reduction Theorem is
known for all proper subgroups of G. In the first subsection below we collect some
consequences of this induction hypothesis. The proof of the induction step is in
§7.3.

7.1. Consequences of the induction hypothesis. This next result holds for
general G.
Lemma 7.1. Suppose that X is pure spectrum and W    c is a wedge of regular slice
            c                                             c is regular isotropic,
cells. Then W ∧ X is pure. If X is pure and isotropic and W
      c
then W ∧ X is pure and isotropic.

                                                                 c = S mρG . In
  Proof: Using Proposition 4.21 one reduces to the case in which W
that case the claim follows from Corollary 4.25.                             

Proposition 7.2. Suppose H ⊂ G has index 2. If the Slice Theorem holds for H
then the spectrum i∗H M U ((G)) is an isotropic pure spectrum.

   Proof: This is an easy consequence of Corollary 5.20, which gives an associative
algebra equivalence
                      i∗H M U ((G)) ≈ M U ((H)) [H · b̄1 , H · b̄2 , . . . ].
This shows that i∗H M U ((G)) is a wedge of smash products of even dimensional
isotropic slice cells with M U ((H)) , and hence (by Lemma 7.1) an isotropic pure
spectrum since M U ((H)) is.                                                   

Proposition 7.3. Suppose H ⊂ G has index 2. If the Slice Theorem holds for H
then the map
                           i∗H R(∞) → i∗H HZ(2)
is an equivalence.

   Proof: By Proposition 7.2 we know that i∗H M U ((G)) is pure. The claim then
follows from Proposition 6.9.                                                 
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 81


7.2. Certain auxiliary spectra. Our proof of the Reduction Theorem will require
certain auxiliary spectra. For an integer k > 0 we define
                R(k) = M U ((G))/(G · r̄1 , . . . , G · r̄k ) = M U ((G)) ∧ A′
                                                                                    A
where
                             A = S 0 [G · r̄1 , G · r̄2 , . . . ]
                            A′ = S 0 [G · r̄k+1 , G · r̄k+2 , . . . ].
The spectrum R(k) is a right A′ -module, and as in the case of M U ((G)) described
in §6, the filtration of A′ by the “dimension” monomial ideals leads to a filtration
of R(k) whose associated graded spectrum is
                                          R(∞) ∧ A′ .
Thus the reduction theorem also implies that R(k) is a pure isotropic spectrum. By
the results of the previous section, the induction hypothesis implies that i∗H R(k) is
pure and isotropic.
                                                                      m
   We know from Proposition 4.64 that when m is even, the slice Pm      R(k) is given
by
                               P m R(k) ≈ HZ(2) ∧ Wcm
                                   m

where W c ⊂ A′ is the summand consisting of the wedge of slice cells of dimension
                                                              m
m. When m is odd the above discussion implies that T ∧ Pm       R(k) is contractible
for any G-CW spectrum T built entirely from induced G-cells. In particular, the
equivariant homotopy groups of EP+ ∧ R(k) may be investigated by smashing the
slice tower of R(k) with EP+ , and we will do so in §7.3, where we will exploit some
very elementary aspects of the situation.
7.3. Proof of the Reduction Theorem. As mentioned at the beginning of the
section, our proof of the Reduction Theorem is by induction on |G|, the case of
the trivial group being a result of Quillen. We may therefore assume that G is
non-trivial, and that the result is known for all proper subgroups H ⊂ G. By
Proposition 7.3 this implies that the map
                                       R(∞) → HZ(2)
becomes a weak equivalence after applying i∗H .
   For the induction step we smash the map in question with the isotropy separation
sequence (2.44)
                       EP+ ∧ R(∞) / R(∞) / ẼP ∧ R(∞)

                             f                      g                   h
                                                                  
                       EP+ ∧ HZ(2)            / HZ
                                                    (2)
                                                           / ẼP ∧ HZ
                                                                            (2) .

By the induction hypothesis, the map f is an equivalence. It therefore suffices to
show that the map h is, and that, as discussed in Remark 2.49, is equivalent to
showing that
(7.4)                      π∗G h : π∗ ΦG R(∞) → π∗ ΦG HZ(2)
is an isomorphism.
   We first show that the two groups are abstractly isomorphic.
82                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Proposition 7.5. The ring π∗ ΦG HZ(2) is given by
                                   π∗ ΦG HZ(2) = Z/2[b],
with
                      b = u2σ a−2      G         −1 G
                               σ ∈ π2 Φ HZ(2) ⊂ aσ π⋆ HZ(2) .
The groups π∗ ΦG R(∞) are given by
                                              (
                               G                  Z/2   n ≥ 0 even
                          πn Φ R(∞) =
                                                  0     otherwise.

   Proof: The first assertion is a restatement of Proposition 3.18. For the second
we will make use of the monoidal geometric fixed point functor ΦG   M . The main
technical issue is to take care that at key points in the argument we are working
with spectra X for which ΦG X and ΦG    M X are weakly equivalent.
   Recall the definition
                               R(∞) = M Uc((G)) ∧ S 0 ,
                                             A
                                    ((G))
where for emphasis we’ve written M Uc     as a reminder that M U ((G)) has been
replaced by a cofibrant A-module (see §2.4). Proposition B.208 implies that R(∞)
is cofibrant, so there is an isomorphism
                               π∗ ΦG R(∞) ≈ π∗ ΦG
                                                M R(∞)
(Proposition B.201). For the monoidal geometric fixed point functor, Proposi-
tion B.208 gives an isomorphism
               ΦG           G     ((G))
                M (R(∞)) = ΦM (M Uc     ∧ S 0 ) ≈ ΦG    ((G))
                                                   M M Uc     ∧ S0.
                                                  A                    ΦG
                                                                        MA

     We next claim that there are associative algebra isomorphisms
              ΦG      0 G          G                   0 C2       C2
               M A ≈ S [Φ N r̄1 , Φ N r̄2 , . . . ] ≈ S [Φ r̄1 , Φ r̄2 , . . . ].
For the first, decompose A into an indexed wedge, and use Proposition B.192. For
the second use the fact that the monoidal geometric fixed point functor distributes
over wedges, and for V and W representations of C2 , can be computed in terms of
the isomorphisms
                                                  G         G
                                      − indC2 W
       ΦG   G
        M (NC2 (S
                  −W
                     ∧ S V )) ≈ ΦG
                                 M (S           ∧ S indC2 V ) ≈ ΦC
                                                                 M (S
                                                                   2  −W
                                                                         ∧ S V ).
                                      ((G))
     By Proposition B.202, ΦG
                            M M Uc            is a cofibrant ΦG
                                                              M A-module, and so

             ΦG    ((G))
              M M Uc     ∧ S 0 ≈ ΦG
                                  MMU
                                      ((G))
                                            /(ΦG          G
                                               M N r̄1 , ΦM N r̄2 , . . . ).
                           ΦG
                            MA

            ((G))
Since M Uc     is a cofibrant A-module, and the polynomial algebra A has the
                                                                ((G))
property that S −1 ∧ A is cofibrant, the spectrum underlying M Uc     is cofibrant
(Corollary B.207). This means that
                                        ΦG    ((G))
                                         M M Uc
and
                          ΦG M Uc((G)) ∼ ΦG M U ((G)) ∼ M O
are related by a functorial zig-zag of weak equivalences (Proposition B.201). Putting
all of this together, we arrive at the equivalence
                         ΦG R(∞) ∼ M O/(ΦC2 r̄1 , ΦC2 r̄2 , . . . ).
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                              83


By Proposition 5.50                             (
                                  G                 hi   i 6= 2k − 1
                               Φ r̄i =
                                                    0    i = 2k − 1.
From this is an easy matter to compute π∗ M O/(ΦG r̄1 , ΦG r̄2 , . . . ) using the cofi-
bration sequences described at the end of §2.4.3. The outcome is as asserted. 
  Before going further we record a simple consequence of the above discussion
which will be used in §9.1.
Proposition 7.6. The map
                        π∗ ΦG M U ((G)) = π∗ M O → π∗ ΦG HZ(2)
is zero for ∗ > 0.                                                                                 
   A simple multiplicative property reduces the problem of showing that (7.4) is an
isomorphism to showing that it is surjective in dimensions which are a power of 2.
                                                           k−1
Lemma 7.7. If for every k ≥ 1, the class b2                      is in the image of
(7.8)                 π2k ΦG M U ((G))/(G · r̄2k −1 ) → π2k ΦG HZ(2) ,
then (7.4) is surjective, hence an isomorphism.

  Proof: By writing
            R(∞) = M U ((G)) /(G · r̄1 )             ∧     M U ((G))/(G · r̄2 )      ∧       ···
                                                MU ((G))                          MU ((G))
                                          k−1
we see that if for every k ≥ 1, b2              is in the image of (7.8), then all products of
      k−1
the b2    are in the image of
(7.9)                         π∗ ΦG R(∞) → π∗ ΦG HZ(2) .
Hence every power of b is in the image of (7.9).                                                   
  In view of Lemma 7.7, the Reduction Theorem follows from
                                                                 k−1
Proposition 7.10. For every k ≥ 1, the class b2                        is in the image of
                         G        ((G))
                     π2k Φ (M U           /(G · r̄2k −1 )) → π2k ΦG (HZ(2) ).
  To simplify some of the notation, write
                                            ck = 2 k − 1
and
                              Mk = M U ((G))/(G · r̄ck ).
Since S ck ρG is obtained from S ck by attaching induced G-cells, the restriction map
                          πcGk ρG +1 ẼP ∧ Mk → πcGk +1 ẼP ∧ Mk
is an isomorphism (Remark 2.50). The element of interest in this group (the one
          k−1
hitting b2 ) arises from the class
                                   N r̄ck ∈ πcGk ρG M U ((G))
and the fact that it is zero for two reasons in πcGk ρG ẼP ∧ Mk (it has been coned
off in the formation of Mk , and it is zero in πcGk ρG ẼP ∧ M U ((G)) = πck M O by
Proposition 5.50). We make this more precise and prove Proposition 7.10 by chasing
84                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


the class N r̄ck around the sequences of equivariant homotopy groups arising from
the diagram

(7.11)               EP+ ∧ M U ((G))     / M U ((G))     / ẼP ∧ M U ((G))


                                                                     
                        EP+ ∧ Mk              / Mk               / ẼP ∧ Mk


                                                                   
                      EP+ ∧ HZ(2)         / HZ
                                                 (2)
                                                             / ẼP ∧ HZ
                                                                          (2) .

     We start with the top row. By Proposition 5.50 the image of N r̄ck in
                  πcGk ρG ẼP ∧ M U ((G)) ≈ πcGk ẼP ∧ M U ((G)) ≈ πck M O
is zero. There is therefore a class
                               yk ∈ πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ M U ((G))
lifting N r̄ck . The key computation, from which everything follows is
Proposition 7.12. The image under
                     πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ M U ((G)) → πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ HZ(2) ,
of any choice of yk above, is non-zero.


   Proof of Proposition 7.10 assuming Proposition 7.12: We continue chasing around
the diagram (7.11). By construction the image of yk in πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Mk maps to
zero in πcGk ρG Mk . It therefore comes from a class

                                 ỹk ∈ πcGk ρG +1 ẼP ∧ Mk .

The image of ỹk in πcGk ρG +1 ẼP ∧ HZ(2) is non-zero since it has a non-zero image in

                                   πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ HZ(2)
by Proposition 7.12. Now consider the commutative square below, in which the
horizontal maps are the isomorphisms (Remark 2.50) given by restriction along the
                         k
fixed point inclusion S 2 ⊂ S ck ρG +1 :
                                                  ≈
                        πcGk ρG +1 ẼP ∧ Mk             / π Gk ẼP ∧ Mk
                                                             2


                                                                 
                      πcGk ρG +1 ẼP ∧ HZ(2)      ≈
                                                       / π Gk ẼP ∧ HZ
                                                         2                (2) .

                                                                                  k−1
The group on the bottom right is cyclic of order 2, generated by b2 . We’ve just
shown that the image of ỹk under the left vertical map is non-zero. It follows that
                                                     k−1
the right vertical map is non-zero and hence that b2     is in its image.         
     The remainder of this section is devoted to the proof of Proposition 7.12.
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  85


   The advantage of Proposition 7.12 is that it entirely involves G-spectra which
have been smashed with EP+ , and which (as discussed in §7.2) therefore fall under
the jurisdiction of the induction hypothesis. In particular, the map
(7.13)                      EP+ ∧ M U ((G)) → EP+ ∧ HZ(2)
can be studied by smashing the slice tower of M U ((G)) with EP+ .
   We can cut down some the size of things by making use of the spectra introduced
in §7.2. Factor (7.13) as
               EP+ ∧ M U ((G)) → EP+ ∧ R(ck − 1) → EP+ ∧ HZ(2) ,
and replace yk with its image
                             yk ∈ πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ R(ck − 1).
Lemma 7.14. For 0 < m < ck g,
                                          m
                            πck ρG EP+ ∧ Pm R(ck − 1) = 0.
There is an exact sequence
            πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1)         / πcG ρ EP+ ∧ R(ck − 1)
                                                     k G




                                                               
                                                 πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ HZ(2) = Z/2 .


  Proof: Because of the induction hypothesis, we know that the spectrum
                                        m
                                 EP+ ∧ Pm R(ck − 1)
is contractible when m is odd, and that when m is even it is equivalent to
                                EP+ ∧ HZ ∧ Wcm ,

where Wc ⊂ S 0 [G · r̄c , . . . ] is the summand consisting of the wedge of slice cells of
                       k
dimension m. Since 1 < m < ck g all of these cells are induced. This implies that
the map
                               EP+ ∧ HZ ∧ W   cm → HZ ∧ W   cm
is an equivalence, since
                                           EP+ → S 0
is an equivalence after restricting to any proper subgroup of G. But
                   πcG ρ HZ ∧ W                                cm = 0
                                      cm = π0G HZ ∧ S −ck ρG ∧ W
                      k G

since
                                               cm
                               HZ ∧ S −ck ρG ∧ W
is an (m − ck g)-slice and m − ck g < 0. This proves the first assertion. It implies
that the map
              πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) → πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ P1 R(ck − 1)
is surjective. As mentioned in §7.2, Proposition 4.64 implies that P00 R(ck − 1) =
HZ(2) , and so the second assertion follows from the exact sequence of the fibration
         EP+ ∧ P1 R(ck − 1) → EP+ ∧ R(ck − 1) → EP+ ∧ P00 R(ck − 1).
                                                                                        
86                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  The exact sequence in Lemma 7.14 converts the problem of showing that yk has
non-zero image in πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ HZ(2) to showing that it is not in the image of
                             πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1).
We now isolate a property of this image that is not shared by yk . Recall that γ is
a fixed generator of G.
Proposition 7.15. The image of
                                                                i∗
          πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) → πcGk ρG R(ck − 1) −→
                                                             0
                                                               πcuk g R(ck − 1)
is contained in the image of (1 − γ).
   The class yk does not have the property described in Proposition 7.15. Its image
in πcuk g R(ck − 1) is i∗0 N r̄ck which generates a sign representation of G occurring as
a summand of πcuk g R(ck − 1). Thus once Proposition 7.15 is proved the proof of the
Reduction Theorem is complete.
   The proof of Proposition 7.15 makes use of the RO(G)-graded Mackey functor
                                        π ck ρG (X)
and the transfer map
(7.16)                     π ck ρG (X)(C2 ) → π ck ρG (X)(pt),
in which C2 is regarded as a finite G-set through the unique surjective map G →
C2 . By definition (§3.1) of the covariant part π ck ρG ∗ of the Mackey functor, the
map (7.16) is given by the map of equivariant homotopy groups
                            πcGk ρG (X ∧ C2 + ) → πcGk ρG (X)
induced by the unique surjective map C2 → pt.
   There are two steps in the proof of Proposition 7.15. First it is shown (Corol-
lary 7.19) that the image of
                   πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) → πcGk ρG R(ck − 1)
is contained in the image of the transfer map just described. We then show
(Lemma 7.20) that the image of the transfer map in πcuk g R(ck − 1) is in the image
of (1 − γ).
Lemma 7.17. Let M ≥ 0 be a G-spectrum, and regard C2 as a finite G-set using
the unique surjective map G → C2 . The image of
                                π0G EP+ ∧ M → π0G M
is the image of the transfer map
                                π0G M ∧ C2 + → π0G M.

   Proof: As mentioned in Remark 2.48, the space EP+ can be taken to be the space
  ∞
S+   on which γ acts through the antipodal action. The standard cell decomposition
in this model has 0-skeleton C2 + . Since M is (−1)-connected (Proposition 4.11)
this implies that π0G C2+ ∧M → π0G EP+ ∧M is surjective, and the claim follows. 

Corollary 7.18. The image of
                 πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) → πcGk ρG Pck g R(ck − 1)
is contained in the image of the transfer map.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               87


  Proof: This follows from Lemma 7.17 above, after the identification
                 πcGk ρG Pck g R(ck − 1) ≈ π0G S −ck ρG ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1)
and the observation that
                S −ck ρG ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) ≈ P0 (S −ck ρG ∧ R(ck − 1))
is ≥ 0.                                                                            

Corollary 7.19. The image of
                   πcGk ρG EP+ ∧ Pck g R(ck − 1) → πcGk ρG R(ck − 1)
is contained in the image of the transfer map.

  Proof: Immediate from Corollary 7.18 and the naturality of the transfer.         
   The remaining step is the special case X = Pck g R(ck − 1), V = ck ρG of the next
result.
Lemma 7.20. Let X be a G-spectrum, V a virtual representation of G of virtual
dimension d, and regard C2 as a finite G-set through the unique surjective map
G → C2 . Write ǫ ∈ {±1} for the degree of
                                   γ : i∗0 S V → i∗0 S V .
The image of
                          πVG (X ∧ C2 + ) → πVG X → πdu X
is contained in the image of
                               (1 + ǫγ) : πdu X → πdu X.

  Proof: Consider the diagram
                              πVG (X ∧ C2+ )           / πG X
                                                             V


                                                          
                              πdu (X ∧ C2 + )          / πu X .
                                                             d

The non-equivariant identification
                                    C2 + ≈ S 0 ∨ S 0
gives an isomorphism of groups of non-equivariant stable maps
                        [S V , X ∧ C2 + ] ≈ [S V , X] ⊕ [S V , X],
and so an isomorphism of the group in the lower left hand corner with
                                      πdu X ⊕ πdu X
under which the generator γ ∈ G acts as
                                  (a, b) 7→ (ǫγb, ǫγa).
The map along the bottom is (a, b) 7→ a + b. Now the image of the left vertical map
is contained in the set of elements invariant under γ which, in turn, is contained in
the set of elements of the form
                                       (a, ǫγa).
The result follows.                                                                
88                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Proof of Proposition 7.15: As described after its statement, Proposition 7.15 is
a consequence of Corollary 7.19 and Lemma 7.20.                                  


                                8. The Gap Theorem
   The proof of the Gap Theorem was sketched in the introduction, and various
supporting details were scattered throughout the paper. We collect the story here
for convenient reference.
   Given the Slice Theorem, the Gap Theorem is a consequence of the following
special case of Proposition 3.20
Proposition 8.1. Suppose that G = C2n is a non-trivial group, and m ≥ 0. Then
                        i
                       HG (S mρG ; Z(2) ) = 0       for 0 < i < 4.
                                                                                   
Lemma 8.2 (The Cell Lemma). Let G = C2n for some n > 0. If Sb is an isotropic
slice cell of even dimension, then the groups πkG HZ(2) ∧ Sb are zero for −4 < k < 0.


     Proof: Suppose that
                                    Sb = G+ ∧ S mρH
                                             H
with H ⊂ G non-trivial. By the Wirthmüller isomorphism
                           πkG HZ(2) ∧ Sb ≈ πkH HZ(2) ∧ S mρH ,

so the assertion is reduced to the case Sb = S mρG with G non-trivial. If m ≥ 0 then
πkG HZ(2) ∧ Sb = 0 for k < 0. For the case m < 0 write i = −k, m′ = −m > 0, and
                                                     ′
                           πkG HZ(2) ∧ Sb = HG
                                             i
                                               (S m ρG ; Z(2) ).
The result then follows from Proposition 8.1.                                      

Theorem 8.3. If X is pure and isotropic, then
                               πiG X = 0        − 4 < i < 0.


     Proof: Immediate from the slice spectral sequence for X and the Cell Lemma. 

Corollary 8.4. If Y can be written as a directed homotopy colimit of isotropic pure
spectra, then
                           πiG X = 0      − 4 < i < 0.
                                                                                   
Theorem 8.5 (The Gap Theorem). Let G = C2n with n > 0 and D ∈ πℓρG M U ((G))
be any class. Then for −4 < i < 0
                                  πiG D−1 M U ((G)) = 0.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  89




  Proof: The spectrum D−1 M U ((G)) is the homotopy colimit
                                holim Σ−j ℓρG M U ((G)).
                                  −→
                                    j

By the Slice Theorem, M U ((G)) is pure and isotropic. But then the spectrum
                                    Σ−j ℓρG M U ((G))
is also pure and isotropic, since for any X
                                m ρG         m−g
                               Pm Σ X ≈ ΣρG Pm−g X
by Corollary 4.25. The result then follows from Corollary 8.4.                         

                          9. The Periodicity Theorem
   In this section we will describe a general method for producing periodicity results
for spectra obtained from M U ((G)) by inverting suitable elements of π⋆G M U ((G)). The
Periodicity Theorem (Theorem 9.19) used in the proof of Theorem 1.1 is a special
case. The proof relies on a small amount of computation of π⋆G M U ((G)).
9.1. The RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence for M U ((G)). Let σ = σG be
the real sign representation of G, and
                                           G
                                u = u2σ ∈ π2−2σ HZ(2)
the element defined in Definition 3.12. Since
                                   P00 M U ((G)) = HZ
the powers um define elements
                      um ∈ E20,2m−2mσ = π2m−2mσ
                                         G
                                                P00 M U ((G))
in the E2 -term of the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence
                    E2s,t = πt−s
                             G    dim t
                                 Pdim t MU
                                           ((G))
                                                 =⇒ πt−s M U ((G)) ,
with t ∈ −2mσ + Z. Our periodicity theorems depend on the fate of these elements.
To study them it is convenient to consider odd negative multiples of σ as well, and
to investigate the slice spectral sequences for π∗−kσ for k ≥ 0.
   It turns out to be enough to investigate the groups E2s,t with s ≥ (g − 1)((t −
s) − (k − kσ)), where g = |G|. The situation is depicted in Figures 2-4. We have, in
fact, already described all of the groups in this range. To see this write t′ = dim t
so that t = t′ + (k − kσ), and
                                                      ′
                          E2s,t = πtG′ −s+k S kσ ∧ Ptt′ M U ((G)).
                ′
Since S kσ ∧ Ptt′ M U ((G)) ≥ t′ , part iii) of Proposition 4.40 tells us that this group
vanishes if
                                    t′ − s + k < ⌊t′ /g⌋,
and hence if
                             s > (g − 1) (t − s) + kσ) + k.
                                                                     ′
This gives the vanishing line depicted in Figures 2-4. Now Ptt′ M U ((G)) is contractible
unless t′ is even, in which case it a wedge of G-spectra of the form HZ ∧ Sb where
90                      M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL




                                                           G
                Figure 2. The slice spectral sequence for π−2mσ+∗ M U ((G))


Sb is a slice cell of dimension t′ . Since the restriction of σ to any proper subgroup
is trivial, when Sb = G+ ∧ S ℓ ρH is an induced slice cell, there are isomorphisms
                               ′

                            H
                                               ′                       ′   
      S   kσ
               ∧ HZ ∧ Sb ≈ G+ ∧ S kσ ∧ HZ ∧ S ℓ ρH ≈ G+ ∧ S k ∧ HZ ∧ S ℓ ρH
                                H                                H

an so πtG′ −s+k S kσ ∧ HZ ∧ Sb is isomorphic to
                                                     ′
                                     πtH′ −s HZ ∧ S ℓ ρH .
This group vanishes if
                             t′ − s < ℓ′ = t′ /h         (h = |H|),
so certainly when
                                       t′ − s ≤ t′ /g,
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             91




                                                    G
         Figure 3. The slice spectral sequence for π−(2m+1)σ+∗ M U ((G))


or, equivalently when
                                                       
                         s ≥ (g − 1) (t − s) − (k − kσ) .
Thus in this range only the non-induced slice cells contribute.
   The only even dimensional slice cells which are not induced are those of the form
S ℓρG . We are therefore studying the groups
                                 πjG HZ ∧ S kσ ∧ S ℓρG
with j ≤ ℓ + k and k, ℓ ≥ 0.
Lemma 9.1. For k, ℓ ≥ 0 and j ≤ ℓ + k the group
                                 πjG HZ ∧ S kσ ∧ S ℓρG
92                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL




                          Figure 4. Differentials on um

is given by
                    
                    
                    0                                if (j − ℓ) < 0 or (j − ℓ) is odd
  G       kσ   ℓρG
 πj HZ ∧ S ∧ S     ≈ Z/2 · {aℓρ̄ ak−2m
                                  σ    um
                                        2σ }          if (j − ℓ) = 2m ≥ 0 and ℓ > 0
                    
                              m
                      Z(2) · {u2σ }                   if (j − ℓ) = 2m ≥ 0 and ℓ = 0.

   Proof: This computation reduces to the one described in Example 3.16. To see
this, write
                   S kσ ∧ S ℓρG = S (k+ℓ)σ ∧ S ℓ ∧ S ℓ(ρG −σ−1) ,
and consider the map
(9.2)          aℓρ̄−σ : πjG HZ ∧ S (k+ℓ)σ ∧ S ℓ → πjG HZ ∧ S kσ ∧ S ℓρG .
given by multiplication by aℓρ̄−σ . When ℓ = 0 this map it is an isomorphism. When
ℓ > 0, the space S ℓ(ρG −σ−1) has the structure of a G-CW complex with one 0-cell
and all other G-cells of positive dimension and induced from proper subgroups.
Smashing with S (k+ℓ)σ and using the fact that the restriction of σ to every proper
subgroup of G is trivial, one finds that S kσ ∧ S ℓρG is obtained from S (k+ℓ)σ ∧ S ℓ
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                    93


by attaching induced G-cells of dimension greater than (k + 2ℓ). This implies that
the map aℓρ̄−σ is an isomorphism for j < k + 2ℓ, and so certainly for j ≤ k + ℓ since
ℓ > 0. Thus in the range of interest, multiplication by aℓρ̄−σ is isomorphism, and
the computation reduces to the evaluation of
                                  πjG HZ ∧ S (k+ℓ)σ ∧ S ℓ .
These groups were described in Example 3.16.                                              
   To complete the description of the E2 -term of the RO(G)-graded slice spectral
sequence in this range we need to identify the summand of non-induced slices of
M U ((G)). From the associative algebra equivalence
                        _
                           Pkk M U ((G)) ∼ HZ ∧ S 0 [G.r̄1 , . . . ]
                          k∈Z

this is equivalent to identifying the summand of non-induced slice cells in the twisted
monoid ring
                                      S 0 [G · r̄1 , . . . ].
Since the smash product of an induced spectrum with any spectrum is induced, we
can do this by identifying the summand of non-induced slice cells in each
                                          S 0 [G · r̄i ]
and smashing them together.
  Take the generating inclusion
                                    r̄i : S iρC2 → S 0 [r̄i ],
apply NCG2 to obtain
                                 N r̄i : S iρG → S 0 [G · r̄i ],
and extend it to an associative algebra map
(9.3)                             S 0 [N r̄i ] → S 0 [G · r̄i ].
Lemma 9.4. The map (9.3) is the inclusion of the summand of non-induced slice
cells.

   Proof: The distributive law expresses S 0 [G · r̄i ] = NCG2 S 0 [r̄i ] as an indexed wedge
(see §2.4)
                                              _
                             S 0 [G · r̄i ] ≈           S Vf ,
                                                f :G/C2 →N0
           Lg/2
and Vf = i=1 γ i f (γ i )ρC2 . We now decompose the right hand side into an ordinary
wedge over the G-orbits. Since an indexed wedge over a G-orbit is induced from
the stabilizer of any element of the orbit, the summand of non-induced slice cells
consists of those f which are constant. If f : G/C2 is the constant function with
value n, then Vf = nρG , so the summand of non-induced slice cells is
                                      _
                                         S nρG .
                                            n

The result follows easily from this.                                                      
   Smashing these together gives
94                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Corollary 9.5. The associative algebra map
                             S 0 [N r̄1 , . . . ] → S 0 [G · r̄1 , . . . ]
is the inclusion of the summand of non-induced slice cells.
     To put this all together, consider the Z × RO(G)-graded ring
                                   Z(2) [a, fi , u]/(2a, 2fi )
with
                                      |a| = (1, 1 − σ)
                                     |fi | = (i(g − 1), ig)
                                     |u| = (0, 2 − 2σ).
Define a map
                                                                M
(9.6)                    Z(2) [a, fi , u]/(2a, 2fi ) →                  E2s,t
                                                               s,k≥0
                                                              t∈∗−kσ

by
                                            i(g−1),ig              ig
                      fi 7→ aiρ̄ N r̄i ∈ E2                = πiG Pig  M U ((G))
                       a 7→ aσ ∈ E21,1−σ = π−σ P00 0M U ((G))


and by sending u to the element u ∈ E20,2−2σ described at the beginning of this
section. The combination of Lemmas 9.1 and 9.4 gives
Proposition 9.7. The map
                                                                M
(9.8)                    Z(2) [a, fi , u]/(2a, 2fi ) →                  E2s,t
                                                               s,k≥0
                                                              t∈∗−kσ

is an isomorphism in the range
                            s ≥ (g − 1)((t − s) − (k − kσ)).
                                                                                  
   We now turn to the differentials. By construction, the fi are the representatives
at the E2 -term of the slice spectral sequence of the elements defined in Defini-
tion 5.51 (and also called fi ). They are therefore permanent cycles. Similarly, the
element a is the representative of aσ and also a permanent cycle. This leaves the
powers of u. The case G = C2 of the following result appears in unpublished work
of Araki and in Hu-Kriz [35].
Theorem 9.9 (Slice Differentials Theorem). In the slice spectral sequence for
                                     k−1
π⋆G M U ((G)) the differentials di u2    are zero for i < r = 1 + (2k − 1)g, and
                                          k−1          k
                                    dr u2       = a2 f2k −1 .
Remark 9.10. It follows from Proposition 9.7 that what lies on the “vanishing line”
                                                   
                           s = (g − 1) (t − s) + kσ + k
is the algebra
                                    Z(2) [a, fi ]/(2a, 2fi ).
                                  KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  95


In Proposition 5.50 it was shown that the kernel of the map
         Z(2) [aσ , fi ]/(2a, 2fi ) → π⋆G M U ((G)) → π⋆G ΦG M U ((G)) = π∗ M O[a±1
                                                                                 σ ]

is the ideal (2, f1 , f3 , f7 , . . . ). The only possible non-trivial differentials into the
vanishing line must therefore land in this ideal.
   For the proof of Theorem 9.9 the reader may find it helpful to consult Figure 4.

   Proof of Theorem 9.9: We establish the differential by induction on k. Assume
the result for k ′ < k. Then what’s left in the range s ≥ (g − 1)(t − s − k) after the
differentials assumed by induction is the sum of two modules over Z(2) [fi ]/(2fi ).
                         k
One is generated by a2 and is free over the quotient ring
                                 Z/2[fi ]/(f1 , f3 , . . . , f2k−1 −1 ).
                                    k−1
The other is generated by u2 . Since the differential must take its value in the
                                                                               k−1
ideal (2, a, f1 , f3 , . . . ), the next (and only) possible differential on u2    is the one
                                                                                 2k−1
asserted in the theorem. So all we need do is show that the classes u                  do not
survive the spectral sequence. For this it suffices to do so after inverting a. Consider
the map
                                   a−1  G
                                    σ π⋆ M U
                                             ((G))
                                                   → a−1  G
                                                      σ π⋆ HZ(2) .
We know the Z-graded homotopy groups of both sides, since they can be identified
                                                                           k−1
with the homotopy groups of the geometric fixed point spectrum. If u2          is a
                                     k  k−1
permanent cycle, then the class a−2 u2      is as well, and represents a class with
non-zero image in π∗G ΦG HZ(2) . This contradicts Proposition 7.6.               

Remark 9.11. After inverting aσ , the differentials described in Theorem 9.9 describe
completely the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence. The spectral sequence starts
from
                                   Z/2[fi , a±1 , u].
              k−1
The class u2        hits a unit multiple of f2k −1 , and so the E∞ -term is
                            Z/2[fi , i 6= 2k − 1][a±1 ] = M O∗ [a±1 ]
which we know to be the correct answer since ΦG M U ((G)) = M O. This also shows
                 k−1
that the class u2    is a permanent cycle modulo (r̄2k −1 ). This fact corresponds to
the main computation in the proof of Theorem 6.5 (which, of course we used in the
above proof). The logic can be reversed, and in [35] the results are established in
the reverse order (for the group G = C2 ).
   Write
                                                G            ((G))
                             d̄k = N r̄2k −1 ∈ π(2k −1)ρ M U
                                                        G
                                                                   ,
and note that with this notation
                                                           k
                                          f2k −1 = aρ̄2 −1 d̄k .
In the proof of the corollary below we will make use of the identity
                                           k+1                              k
                                                 −1
(9.12)                 f2k+1 −1 d̄k = a2ρ̄            d̄k+1 d̄k = f2k −1 a2ρ̄ d̄k+1 .
                       k
   The map d̄k : S (2 −1)ρG → M U ((G)) is represented at the E2 -term of the RO(G)-
                                                               k             (2k−1 )g
graded slice spectral sequence by a map S (2 −1)ρG → P(2k−1 )g M U ((G)) which we
96                      M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL

                                                                                                   k
will also call d̄k . Multiplying, this defines elements d̄k u2 in the E2 -term of the
RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence.
Corollary 9.13. In the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence for M U ((G)) , the class
      k
d̄k u2 is a permanent cycle.

     Proof: Write
                                              r = 1 + (2k+1 − 1)g.
                                                                             k                     k
Theorem 9.9 implies that differentials di (d̄k u2 ) = d̄k di (u2 ) are zero for i < r, and
                                k                     k+1                          k+1                 k
                    dr (d̄k u2 ) = d̄k a2                   f2k+1 −1 = a2                f2k −1 a2ρ̄ d̄k+1 ,
the second equality coming from (9.12) above. But from the earlier differential
                                                            k−1          k
                                              dr′ u2              = a2 f2k −1
where r′ = 1 + (2k − 1)g < r, we also have
                                    k−1       k        k                     k+1               k
                         dr′ (u2          a2 a2ρ̄ d̄k+1 ) = a2                     f2k −1 a2ρ̄ d̄k+1
                            k
so that in fact dr (d̄k u2 ) = 0. The target of the remaining differentials work out
to be in a region of the spectral sequence which is already zero at the E2 -term. So
once we check this, the proof is complete.
   To check the claim about the vanishing region first note that with our conven-
tions, differential di+1 of the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence maps a sub-
quotient of
                                        G n
                                       πm Pn X
to a sub-quotient of
                                      G    n+i
                                    πm−1  Pn+i X.
The class in question starts out at the E2 -term as
                                k                                                (2k −1)g
                        d̄k u2 ∈ π2Gk (2−2σ)+(2k −1)ρG P(2k −1)g M U ((G))
so we are interested in the groups
                                                                         (2k −1)g+i
                          π2Gk (2−2σ)+(2k −1)ρG −1 P(2k −1)g+i M U ((G))
or, equivalently
                                    k+1                      k                   (2k −1)g+i                
                    π2Gk+1 −1 S 2         σ
                                              ∧ S −(2 −1)ρG ∧ P(2k −1)g+i M U ((G))
with i + 1 > r = 1 + (2k+1 − 1)g. To simplify the notation, write
                                                  k                 (2k −1)g+i
                           Xi = S −(2 −1)ρG ∧ P(2k −1)g+i M U ((G)) ,
so that the group we are interested in is
                                                                   k+1           
(9.14)                                     π2Gk+1 −1 S 2                 σ
                                                                             ∧ Xi .
Now
                                                             Xi ≥ i.
so Proposition 4.40 implies that
                                                            πjG Xi = 0
                                k+1
for j < ⌊i/g⌋. Since S 2 σ is (−1)-connected this means that if i ≥ 2k+1 g the
group (9.14) is trivial. The remaining values of i are strictly between (2k+1 − 1)g
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             97


and (2k+1 )g, and hence not divisible by g. But since M U ((G)) is pure, when i is not
                                  (2k −1)g+i
divisible by g the spectrum P(2k −1)g+i M U ((G)) is induced from a proper subgroup
of G, hence so is Xi . There is therefore an equivalence
                                  k+1                   k+1
                                 S2        σ
                                               ∧ Xi ≈ S 2     ∧ Xi ,
and so                                                               
                               k+1                            k+1
                 π2Gk+1 −1 S 2        σ
                                          ∧ Xi = π2Gk+1 −1 S 2    ∧ Xi = 0
since Xi ≥ 0.                                                                       

9.2. Periodicity theorems. We now turn to our main periodicity theorem. As
will be apparent to the reader, the technique can be used to get a much more
general result. We have chosen to focus on a case which contains what is needed
for the proof of Theorem 1.1, and yet can be stated for general G = C2n .
   Our motivating example is the spectrum KR of “real” K-theory [7]. Multi-
plication by the real Bott class r̄1 ∈ πρ2 KR is an isomorphism, giving KR an S ρ2 -
periodicity. On the other hand, the representation 4ρ2 admits a Spin structure, and
the construction of the KO-orientation of Spin bundles leads to a “Thom” class
u ∈ π8C2 KR ∧ S 4ρ2 . This class is represented at the E2 -term of the slice spectral
sequence by u4ρ2 . Multiplication by r̄14 u is then an equivariant map S 8 ∧ KR → KR
whose underlying map of non-equivariant spectra is an equivalence. It therefore
gives an equivalence S 8 ∧ KRhC2 ≈ KRhC2 . Since the map KO → KRhC2 is an equiv-
alence, this gives the 8-fold periodicity of KO.
   In our situation we begin with an equivariant commutative ring R, a represen-
tation V of G, and an element D ∈ πVG R. We manually create a spectrum with
S V -periodicity by working with the homotopy colimit, D−1 R, of the sequence
                           D                        D
                        R −→ S −V ∧ R −→ S −2V ∧ R → · · · .
The unit inclusion
                                               S 0 → D−1 R
gives a map
                             HZ = P00 S 0 → P00 D−1 R
and hence defines, for every oriented representation W of G, elements
                         uW ∈ πdim W −W P00 R = E20,dim W −W
in the E2 -term of the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence for π⋆G D−1 R. We
will show, under certain hypotheses on D, that there is an integer k > 0 with
the property that ukV is a permanent cycle. Let u ∈ π⋆G D−1 R be any element
representing ukV . Then the equivariant map
                                                u                 Dk
                     S k dim V ∧ D−1 R −
                                       → S kV ∧ D−1 R −−→ D−1 R
induces an equivalence of underlying, non-equivariant spectra, and hence an equiv-
alence of homotopy fixed point spectra
                                          hG          hG
                        S k dim V ∧ D−1 R     → D−1 R      .
This establishes a periodicity theorem for the homotopy fixed point spectrum
(D−1 R)hG .
  The exposition is cleanest when one exploits multiplicative properties of the
spectrum D−1 R. There are some easy general things to say at first. The spectrum
98                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


D−1 R is certainly an R-module, and inherits a homotopy commutative multipli-
cation (over R) from R. The technique of [22, §VIII.4] can be used to show that
the non-equivariant spectrum underlying D−1 R has a unique commutative algebra
structure for which the map i∗0 R → i∗0 D−1 R is a map of commutative rings.
   With an additional assumption on D, one can go further. Let H ⊂ G be a
                                                                   G ∗
subgroup, and suppose that there is an m > 0 for which the norm NH  iH D divides
  m            m      ′     G ∗
D . Write   D   =  D   · N   i
                            H H D  , and  to keep  the notation compact abbreviate
  G ∗           G
NH   iH D to NH   D. Then there is a commutative diagram
                    G
                   NH (D)                       NHG (D)                  
          G
         NH R                / N G S −V ∧ R                / N G S −2V ∧ R · · ·
                                H                            H



                    G
                    NH (D)
                                                 G
                                                 NH (D)
                                                                       
           R                    / S −V ′ ∧ R                 / S −2V ′ ∧ R · · ·

            1                          D′                              D′2
                                                                    
                     Dm         / S −mV ∧ R        Dm        / S −2mV ∧ R · · ·
           R

in which V ′ = indG
                  H V . Passing to the colimit gives a map
                               G ∗
                                           
                             NH  iH D−1 R → D−1 R
extending the iterated multiplication. This allows one to form norms of elements
in π⋆H D−1 R as if D−1 R were an equivariant commutative ring.
   A necessary condition for D−1 R to actually be an equivariant commutative ring,
                                         G ∗
is that for every H ⊂ G the norm NH        iH D divides a power of D. In fact the
condition is also sufficient. The proof of the result below is described in [29].
Proposition 9.15. Let R be an equivariant commutative ring and D ∈ π⋆G R. If D
                                                    G ∗
has the property that for every H ⊂ G, the element NH iH D divides a power of D,
                     −1
then the spectrum D R has a unique equivariant commutative algebra structure
for which the map R → D−1 R is a map of commutative rings.                    
   We will not make use of Proposition 9.15, as the ad hoc formation of norms from
the non-trivial subgroups of G is sufficient for our purpose.
   Suppose that t ∈ RO(G) and u ∈ πtH D−1 R is represented at the E2 -term of
the RO(H)-graded slice spectral sequence by the image of u′ ∈ πtH HZ under the
map πtH HZ → πtH P00 D−1 R induced by the unit. We then have an H-equivariant
commutative diagram

                                  S t ❯❯❯❯
                               ss         ❯❯❯❯
                          u ss
                              s               ❯❯❯❯u′
                           s                        ❯❯❯❯
                        sss                             ❯❯❯❯
                    ys                                     ❯❯❯*
                 −1   o              −1        /  0 −1
                D R            P0 D R            P0 D R o        HZ.

The maps in the bottom row are maps of homotopy commutative ring spectra. Since
                                                                     G
the formation of slice sections commutes with filtered colimits, if NH D divides a
power of D then the spectra along the bottom row also come equipped with maps
  G
NH  ( − ) → ( − ) extending the iterated multiplication, and compatible with the
maps between them. This means we may apply the norm to the whole diagram to
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  99


produce
                                        G
                                   S indH t ❯❯
                           G      tt          ❯❯❯❯
                         NH  u ttt                ❯❯❯N❯HG u′
                            tt                           ❯❯❯❯
                           t                                 ❯❯❯❯
                        ytt                                     ❯❯❯*
                   D−1 R o       P0 D−1 R          / P00 D−1 R o      HZ.
               G ′
showing that NH                                                 G
                 u is a permanent cycle representing the class NH u ∈ πindG
                                                                          H t
                                                                              D−1 R.
   We will take R to be the spectrum M U ((G)). In order to specify the element
D we need to consider all of the spectra M U ((H)) for H ⊂ G, and we’ll need to
distinguish some of the important elements of the homotopy groups we’ve specified.
We use (5.1) to map
                            π⋆H M U ((H)) → π⋆H M U ((G)),
and make all of our computations in π⋆H M U ((G)). Let
                                   C2               C2
                           r̄iH ∈ πiρ2
                                       M U ((H)) ⊂ πiρ2
                                                        M U ((G))
be the element defined in §5.4.2, and
                        d̄H    H     H          H
                          k = NC2 (r̄2k −1 ) ∈ π(2k −1)ρH M U
                                                              ((G))
                                                                    .
Finally, in addition to g = |G| we will write h = |H| for H ⊂ G.
                               G
Theorem 9.16. Let D ∈ πℓρ        G
                                   M U ((G)) be any class having the property that for
                                              G ∗
every nontrivial H ⊂ G, the element NH         iH D divides a power of D, and whose
          H      ((G))                   H                2g/2
image in π⋆ M U        is divisible by d̄g/h . The class u2ρG
                                                                is a permanent cycle in
                                                   G −1      ((G))
the RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence for π⋆ D M U              .

                                                                                      g/h
   Proof: By Corollary 9.13, for each nontrivial subgroup H ⊂ G, the class d̄H      2
                                                                               g/h u2σH
                                                                            H      ((G))
is a permanent cycle in the RO(H)-graded slice spectral sequence for π⋆ M U              .
       ∗                     H                2g/h
Since iH D is divisible by d̄g/h , the class u2σh is then a permanent cycle in the
RO(G)-graded slice spectral sequence for π⋆H D−1 M U ((G)). From this inventory of
                                                                                 2g/2
permanent cycles, and the ad hoc norm described above, we will show that u2ρ        G
                                                                                       is
also a permanent cycle.
   To begin, note that if H ⊂ G has index 2, then indG  H 1 = 1 + σG . It follows from
Lemma 3.13 that
                                          g/2  G
                                u2ρG = u2σG NH   u2ρH .
This leads to the formula
                                            Y           kh/2
                               uk2ρG =             G
                                                  NH (u2σH ).
                                         06=H⊂G

             g/2
When k = 2     we have kh/2 = 2 h/2 ≥ 2g/h for every h 6= 1 dividing g, so every
                                     g/2

term in the product is a permanent cycle (the inequality is an equality only when
h = 2). This completes the proof.                                               
  Write ∆G = u2ρG d̄G
                    1 .

Corollary 9.17. In the situation of Theorem 9.16 the class
                                      g/2        g/2       g/2
(9.18)                         (∆G )2          2
                                            = u2ρG
                                                   (d̄G
                                                      1 )
                                                         2·2
100                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL

                                        G       −1
is a permanent cycle. Any class in π2·g·2 g/2 D    M U ((G)) represented by (9.18) re-
stricts to a unit in π∗u D−1 M U ((G)).


    Proof: The fact that (9.18) is a permanent cycle is immediate from Theorem 9.16.
Since the slice tower refines the Postnikov tower, the restriction of an element in the
RO(G)-graded group π⋆G D−1 M U ((G)) to π∗u D−1 M U ((G)) is determined entirely by
any representative at the E2 -term of the slice spectral sequence. Since u2ρG restricts
to 1, the restriction of any representative of (9.18) is equal to the restriction of
     2·2g/2
(d̄G
   1)       , which is a unit since d̄G
                                      1 divides D.                                   
  This gives
Theorem 9.19. With the notation of Theorem 9.16, if M is any equivariant
                                                   g/2
D−1 M U ((G))-module, then multiplication by (∆G )2    is a weak equivalence
                                         g/2
                                    Σ2·g·2     i∗0 M → i∗0 M
and hence an isomorphism
                              g/2
                       (∆G )2       : π∗ M hG → π∗+2·g·2g/2 M hG .
                                                                                     
                                                               −1    ((G)) hG
   For example, in the case of G = C2 the groups π∗ (D M U        ) are periodic
with period 2 ∗ 2 ∗ 2 = 8 and for G = C4 there is a periodicity of 2 ∗ 4 ∗ 22 = 32.
For G = C8 we have a period of 2 ∗ 8 ∗ 24 = 256.
Remark 9.20. Suppose that D ∈ π⋆G R is of the form
                                         D = NCG2 x.
Then for C2 ⊂ H ⊂ G one has
                                      G ∗
                                     NH iH D = Dg/h .
Indeed,
             G ∗        G ∗
            NH i H D = NH              G
                          iH NCG2 x = NH (NCH2 )g/h = NCG2 xg/h = Dg/h .
Since each d̄H                                                   G H
             k has this form, any class D which is a product of NH d̄k has the
property required for Theorems 9.16 and 9.19.
Corollary 9.21 (The Periodicity Theorem). Let G = C8 , and
                  D = (NCC28 d̄C     C8 C4       C8     G
                               4 ) (NC4 d̄2 ) (d̄1 ) ∈ π19ρG M U
                                 2                               ((G))
                                                                       .
Then multiplication by (∆G )16 gives an isomorphism
                  π∗ (D−1 M U ((G)))hG → π∗+256 (D−1 M U ((G)))hG .
                                                                                     
Remark 9.22. For a periodicity theorem, one gets a sufficient inventory of powers
of u2σH as permanent cycles as long as for each H, some d̄H  j is inverted. This is
also enough to prove the Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem. Our particular choice
of d̄H
     g/h is dictated by the requirements of the Detection Theorem.
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              101


                 10. The Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem
   Until now we haven’t had occasion to refer to the function G-spectrum of maps
from a pointed G-space S to a G-spectrum X, which exists as part of the com-
pleteness of SG as a topological G-category. We will write X S for this object, so
             ¯
that
                           SG (Z, X S ) = SG (Z ∧ S, X).
Definition 10.1. A G-spectrum X is cofree if the map
(10.2)                             X → X EG+
adjoint to the projection map EG+ ∧ X → X is a weak equivalence.
  If X is cofree then the map
                           π∗G X → π∗G X EG+ = π∗ X hG
is an isomorphism. The main result of this section (Theorem 10.8) asserts that any
module over D−1 M U ((G)) is cofree.
   The map (10.2) is an equivalence of underlying spectra, and hence becomes
an equivalence after smashing with any G-CW spectrum built entirely out of free
G-cells. In particular, the map
                                     ∼
(10.3)                            → EG+ ∧ (X EG+ )
                          EG+ ∧ X −
is an equivariant equivalence. One exploits this, as in [14], by making use of the
pointed G-space ẼG defined by the cofibration sequence
(10.4)                          EG+ → S 0 → ẼG.
Lemma 10.5. For a G-spectrum X, the following are equivalent:
  i) For all non-trivial H ⊂ G, the spectrum ΦH X is contractible.
 ii) The map EG+ ∧ X → X is a weak equivalence.
iii) The G-spectrum ẼG ∧ X is contractible.


    Proof: The equivalence of the second and third conditions is immediate from the
cofibration sequence defining ẼG. Since EG+ is built from free G-cells, condition
ii) implies condition i). For H ⊂ G non-trivial, we have
               ΦH (ẼG ∧ X) ≈ ΦH (ẼG) ∧ ΦH (X) ≈ S 0 ∧ ΦH (X).
Since the non-equivariant spectrum underlying ẼG is contractible, condition i)
therefore implies that ΦH (ẼG ∧ X) is contractible for all H ⊂ G. But this means
that ẼG ∧ X is contractible (Proposition 2.52).                               

Corollary 10.6. If R is an equivariant ring spectrum satisfying the equivalent
conditions of Lemma 10.5 then any module over R is cofree.
   The condition of Corollary 10.6 requires R to be an equivariant ring spectrum
in the weakest possible sense, namely that R possesses a unital multiplication (not
necessarily associative) in ho SG . Similarly, the “module” condition is also one
taking place in the homotopy category.
102                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Proof: Let M be an R-module. Consider the diagram

(10.7)               EG+ ∧ M              /M                 / ẼG ∧ M


                                                              
                  EG+ ∧ M EG+           / M EG+         / ẼG ∧ M EG+

obtained by smashing M → M EG+ with the sequence (10.4). The fact that R
satisfies the condition i) of Lemma 10.5 implies that any R-module M ′ does since
ΦH (M ) is a retract of ΦH (R ∧ M ) ≈ ΦH (R) ∧ ΦH (M ). Thus both M and M EG+
satisfy the conditions of Lemma 10.5, and the terms on the right in (10.7) are
contractible. The left vertical arrow is the weak equivalence (10.3). It follows that
the middle vertical arrow is a weak equivalence.                                   
   Turning to our main purpose, we now consider a situation similar to the one in
§9.2, and fix a class
                                     G
                               D ∈ πℓρ G
                                         M U ((G))
with the property that for all non-trivial H ⊂ G the restriction of D to π∗H M U ((G))
is divisible by d̄H
                  k for some k which may depend on H.

Theorem 10.8 (Homotopy Fixed Point Theorem). Any module M over D−1 M U ((G))
is cofree, and so
                            π∗G M → π∗ M hG
is an isomorphism.

   Proof: We will show that D−1 M U ((G)) satisfies condition i) of Lemma 10.5. The
result will then follow from Corollary 10.6. Suppose that H ⊂ G is non-trivial.
Then
                    ΦH (D−1 M U ((G))) ≈ ΦH (D)−1 ΦH (M U ((G))).
But D is divisible by d̄H           H
                        k , and so Φ (D) is divisible by

                     ΦH (d̄H      H  H     H            C2 H
                           k ) = Φ (NC2 (r̄2k −1 ))y = Φ (r̄2k −1 )

which is zero by Proposition 5.50. This completes the proof.                        

Corollary 10.9. In the situation of Corollary 9.21, the map “multiplication by
∆G ” gives an isomorphism
                     π∗G (D−1 M U ((G))) → π∗+256
                                            G
                                                  (D−1 M U ((G)) ).

  Proof: In the diagram

                  π∗G (D−1 M U ((G)))          / πG
                                                  ∗+256 (D
                                                             −1
                                                                  M U ((G)))


                                                        
                 π∗ (D−1 M U ((G)))hG          G
                                            / π∗+256 (D−1 M U ((G)))hG
the vertical maps are isomorphisms by Theorem 10.8, and the bottom horizontal
map is an isomorphism by Corollary 9.21.                                   
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                    103


                         11. The Detection Theorem
11.1. Outline of the proof. We now turn to the proof of the Detection Theorem.
For the convenience of the reader, we restate the result.
Theorem 11.1 (The Detection Theorem). If θj ∈ π2j+1 −2 S 0 is an element of
Kervaire invariant 1, and j > 2, then the image of θj in π2j+1 −2 Ω is non-zero.
   To recapitulate, we are working with the group G = C8 , and the spectrum Ω is
the spectrum of G-fixed points in ΩO = D−1 M U ((G)), with D ∈ π19ρ M U ((G)) the
element specified in Corollary 9.21.
Theorem 11.2 (Algebraic Detection Theorem). If
                                            j+1
                             x ∈ Ext2,2
                                    MU∗ (MU) (M U∗ , M U∗ )

is any element mapping to
                                                       j+1
                                    h2j ∈ Ext2,2
                                             A               (Z/2, Z/2)
in the E2 -term of the classical Adams spectral sequence, and j > 2, then the image
of x in H 2 (C8 ; π2uj+1 ΩO ) is nonzero.
  We will prove the Algebraic Detection Theorem by establishing the following.
Proposition 11.3. For j > 2, there is a map
(11.4)                              H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO ) → Q/Z
making the diagram
                       j+1
(11.5)           Ext2,2
                    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )
                                                                 / H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO )


                                                                            
                          j+1
                                                  
                   Ext2,2
                      A         (Z/2, Z/2)                                / Q/Z

commute.
   In (11.5), the bottom row is the Kervaire invariant homomorphism sending h2j
to 1/2. Since the vector space
                                             j+1
                                      Ext2,2
                                         A             (Z/2, Z/2)
has dimension 1, with basis h2j (Adams [3, Theorem 2.5.1]), the Kervaire invariant
homomorphism is completely specified by this property, and is a monomorphism. In
plain language, Proposition 11.3 asserts that the Kervaire invariant homomorphism,
thought of as a map
                                      j+1
                         Ext2,2
                            MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ) → Q/Z,

factors through H 2 (C8 , π2j+1 ΩO ). This directly implies Theorem 11.2.
Remark 11.6. All three of these results (Theorems 11.1 and 11.2, and Proposi-
tion 11.3) remain true without the restriction j > 2. The other cases j ≤ 2 require
separate arguments, and are not needed for the proof of Theorem 1.1, so we do not
include them.
104                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   We now describe the proof of Proposition 11.3, deferring the details to later
subsections. In order to construct the map (11.4) we use of the theory of formal
A-modules to construct a C8 -equivariant ring homomorphism from π∗u ΩO to much
smaller ring. Let A = Z2 [ζ] be the 2-adic completion of the ring obtained by
adjoining an 8th root of unity to the ring of integers, and Ff the Lubin-Tate formal
A-module over A associated to any choice of power series f (x) ∈ A[[x]] satisfying
(see §11.2)
                                   f (x) ≡ πx   mod (x2 )
                                   f (x) ≡ x2   mod (π),
with uniformizer π = ζ − 1. By construction, there is an isomorphism
                                          ≈
                                      A−
                                       → End(Ff )
                                       a 7→ [a](x)

satisfying [a]′ (0) = a. Using the map γ 7→ ζ to identify the group of 8th roots of
unity with C8 gives an action of C8 on Ff extending the canonical action of C2 by
formal multiplication by −1. As described in §11.3.4 below, this data is classify by
a C8 -equivariant map of graded rings
(11.7)                               π∗u M U ((C8 )) → A∗
in which A∗ = A[u±1 ], |u| = 2, and in which the action of the chosen generator
γ ∈ C8 is the A-algebra map sending u to ζu. The first thing to check about this
map is
Proposition 11.8. The image of D ∈ π19ρ M U ((C8 )) under
                       π19ρ M U ((C8 )) → π152
                                           u
                                               M U ((C8)) → A152
is a unit, hence (11.7) factors uniquely through a C8 -equivariant map
(11.9)                                 π∗u ΩO → A∗ .
  Let
                       χ : H 2 (C8 ; π2uj+1 ΩO ) → H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 )
be the map of cohomology groups induced by (11.9). Using χ, form the rightmost
arrow in the diagram below
                       j+1
(11.10)          Ext2,2
                    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )
                                                       / H 2 (C8 ; π uj+1 ΩO )
                                                                      2

                                                                      2
                                                                      π ·χ
                                                                     
                           j+1
                                                         / H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 ) .
                     Ext2,2
                        A      (F2 , F2 )
                                                     j+1
For the bottom arrow, note that both Ext2,2   A    (Z/2, Z/2) and H 1 (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π))
are cyclic of order 2, and hence isomorphic by a unique isomorphism. The bot-
tom arrow in (11.10) is defined to be the map corresponding to the connecting
homomorphism
                        H 1 (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π)) → H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 )
                                           KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                               105

                                                                                        j
under this isomorphism. For j > 2, the action of γ on u2 is trivial, and so
H 2 (C8 , A2j+1 ) ≈ A2j+1 /(8), and one easily checks that this map is a monomor-
phism.
   The main point is the commutativity of the diagram. Once that is established,
the map (11.4) can be taken to be the composition of the right vertical arrow
in (11.10) with any map (dashed arrow)

                                                          H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 )
                                                           6       ✤
                                                      ♠♠♠♠♠          ✤
                                                     ♠
                                                  ♠♠♠                  ✤
                                            ) ♠♠♠♠
                                                   
                            H 1 (C ; A j+1 /(π)) 
                                       8    2                 / Q/Z.

factoring the inclusion through the connecting homomorphism.
   Checking the commutativity of (11.10) involves some technical details about the
              j+1
groups Ext2,2
            MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ). The following lemma can be read off from [78,
Theorem 1.5] (see §11.6).
Lemma 11.11. For j > 1, the map
                           j+1                                          j+1
                 Ext1,2                            2,2
                    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → ExtMU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ )
is surjective after localizing at 2.                                                                             
   Lemma 11.11 enables us to replace the upper left corner of (11.10) with the
            j+1
group Ext1,2
         MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)), and verify the commutativity of

                                   j+1
(11.12)                   Ext1,2
                             MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2))
                                                                           / H 2 (C8 ; π2j+1 ΩO )

                                                                                            2
                                                                                            π ·χ
                                                                                       
                                           j+1                
                                 Ext2,2          (Z/2, Z/2)                   / H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 ).
                                    A

   The key technical point in doing this is
Proposition 11.13. The maps
                             j+1                                           j+1
                   Ext1,2                            2,2
                      MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → ExtA                           (Z/2, Z/2)
                                 j+1
                   Ext1,2                          1
                      MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → H (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π))
are surjective and have the same kernel.
   Proposition 11.13 gives the commutativity of the left square in
           j+1
   Ext1,2
      MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2))
                                                     / H 1 (C8 ; π uj+1 ΩO /(2))
                                                                   2
                                                                                      / H 2 (C8 ; π uj+1 ΩO )
                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                   π ·χ
                                                                                                  
                j+1                              ≈    / H 1 (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π))  
          Ext2,2    (Z/2, Z/2)                                                          / H 2 (C8 ; A2j+1 )
             A

The commutativity of the right hand square follows from the naturality of the con-
necting homomorphism. The outer square is (11.12). This completes our summary
of the proof of the Proposition 11.3 and the Detection Theorem.
106                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Remark 11.14. The argument of this section can be easily adapted to prove a
detection theorem for M U ((C2n )) as long as n ≥ 3. The result does not hold in the
cases n < 3. What fails is the assertion in Proposition 11.13 that the two maps have
the same kernel. This assertion makes essential use of the fact that the reduction
of the Lubin-Tate group over A/(π) has height greater than 2.
   The remainder of this section is devoted to filling in the details of this outline.
We begin in §11.2 by recalling the Lubin-Tate formal A-module [49] and some sim-
ple but useful results relating the power series [a](x) to the π-adic valuation of a.
We turn in §11.3 to the ideas connecting the Adams-Novikov E2 -term to group
cohomology. In §11.3.4 we describe the “conjugation action” and prove Proposi-
tion 11.28 which describes the functor co-represented by π∗u M U ((G)) on the category
of G-equivariant graded commutative rings. Setting all of this up brings us as far
as the statement of Proposition 11.8 which is proved in §11.4. Proposition 11.13 is
proved in §11.5. The proof relies heavily on the computations in [63] and [78], in
the form of Proposition 11.34. An addendum to this section discusses how these
computations are made, and how they lead to Lemmas 11.11 and Proposition 11.34.
   The reader may also wish to consult [64] for another presentation of these ideas.
11.2. Formal A-modules and the Lubin-Tate group. Let A and R be com-
mutative rings, and e : A → R a ring homomorphism. A (1-dimensional) formal
A-module over R is a formal group law F over R, equipped with a ring homomor-
phism
                                       A → End(F )
                                       a 7→ [a](x)
                            ′
with the property that [a] (0) = e(a). In the case of interest to us, e is a monomor-
phism (in fact the identity map), and we will not distinguish in notation between
a and e(a).
   Formal A-modules were introduced by Lubin and Tate in their work [49] on local
class field theory. For A the ring of integers in a local field with finite residue field,
they constructed a formal A-module over A itself, unique up to isomorphism. Their
construction starts with a choice of uniformizer π ∈ A and a power series
                                       f (x) ∈ A[[x]]
intended to be the endomorphism [π](x). Writing q for the order of the residue
field, the power series f is required to satisfy
                                  f (x) ≡ πx     mod (x2 )
                                  f (x) ≡ xq    mod (π).
For example, f (x) could be taken to be πx + xq . Lubin and Tate showed that such
an f determines a formal A-module in which the formal sum is the unique power
series Ff (x, y) ∈ A[[x]] satisfying
                                 Ff (x, y) ≡ x + y      mod (x, y)2
                         Ff (f (x), f (y)) = f (Ff (x, y)),
and for a ∈ A the power series [a](x) is the unique power series satisfying
                                   [a](x) ≡ ax    mod (x)2
                                [a](f (x)) = f ([a](x)).
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               107


In particular, one does indeed have [π](x) = f (x).
   Continuing with the Lubin-Tate formal A-module, for a ∈ A write
                           [a](x) ≡ αd xd + · · ·   mod (π)
with 0 6= αd ∈ A/(π). One easily checks that the function ν(a) = logq (d) defines
a valuation on A. The the fact that [π](x) = f (x) implies that ν is the unique
valuation for which ν(π) = 1.
   We are interested in the case
                                      A = Z2 [ζ],
with π = ζ − 1, and any fixed choice of f (x). Since ν(ζ − 1) = 1, ν(ζ 2 − 1) = 2 and
ν(ζ 4 − 1) = 4, and since any unit in A is congruent to 1 modulo π, this means that
modulo (π)
                               [ζ − 1](x) ≡ x2 + · · ·
                              [ζ 2 − 1](x) ≡ x4 + · · ·
                              [ζ 4 − 1](x) ≡ x16 + · · · ,
and so
                               [ζ](x) ≡ x + x2 + · · ·
                                            Ff

                                       ≡ x + x2 + · · ·
                              [ζ 2 ](x) ≡ x + x4 + · · ·
                                            Ff
(11.15)
                                       ≡ x + x4 + · · ·
                              [ζ 4 ](x) ≡ x + x16 + · · ·
                                            Ff

                                       ≡ x + x16 + · · · .
  These congruences play an important role in the proof of Proposition 11.8.
Remark 11.16. The formulae (11.15) are independent of the choice of f (x). In
particular they hold for a choice of f leading to a 2-typical formal group law.
11.3. Group actions and homogeneous formal group laws. We now turn to
the relationship between group actions on formal group laws and group cohomology.
Our eventual goal involves some explicit formulas, so we begin with a relatively
detailed summary.
                                                                 L
11.3.1. Homogeneous formal group laws. Suppose that R∗ =            Rn is a graded
commutative ring. By Quillen’s work [67, 4] the set of graded ring homomorphisms
                                     M U∗ → R∗
is in one to one correspondence with the set of formal group laws F over R which
are homogeneous of degree −2 in the sense that the formal sum
                                        F (x, y)
is homogeneous of degree −2, when x and y are given degree −2. In terms of the
power series                                X
                         F (x, y) = x + y +   aij xi y j
this means that aij has degree 2(i + j − 1).
108                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The graded ring M U∗ M U = π∗ M U ∧ M U co-represents the functor associating
to a graded ring R∗ the set of pairs (F1 , F2 ) of homogeneous formal group laws
and an isomorphism g : F1 → F2 between them which is strict in the sense that it
is given by a power series of the form
                                [g](x) = x + O(x2 ).
More generally, the ring π∗ M U (n) (n-fold smash product) co-represents functor
associating to a graded ring R∗ the set of chains
                                     F1 → · · · → Fn
of homogeneous formal group laws and strict isomorphisms over R. The standard
convention is that the homogeneous formal group law Fi is the one classified by the
map
                          π∗ M U → π∗ M U ∧ · · · ∧ M U
induced from the inclusion of the ith factor
                  S 0 ∧ · · · ∧ M U ∧ · · · ∧ S 0 → M U ∧ · · · ∧ M U.
   Taken together, the pair (M U∗ , M U∗ M U ) forms the Hopf algebroid which co-
represents the functor associating to a graded commutative ring R∗ the groupoid of
homogeneous formal group laws over R∗ and strict isomorphisms. For the definition
of Hopf algebroid, the reader is referred to [71, Definition A1.1.1].
11.3.2. Group actions. Let MF G be the category of pairs (R, F ), with F a formal
group law over a commutative ring R, and in which a morphism
                            (f, ψ) : (R1 , F1 ) → (R2 , F2 )
consists of a ring homomorphism f : R1 → R2 , and an isomorphism of formal group
              ≈
laws ψ : F2 − → f ∗ F1 . Morphisms can also be described as ring homomorphisms
                                 h : R1 [[x]] → R2 [[x]]
                                         h(r) = f (r)
                                         h(x) = ψ(x)
which are compatible with the formal sum in the sense that the diagram
                                             h    / R2 [[x]]
                              R1 [[x]]

                               F1                        F2
                                                       
                             R1 [[x, y]]         / R2 [[x, y]]
                                             h

commutes. Let MhF G be the analogous category of homogeneous formal group laws
over graded rings, and strict isomorphisms.
  The categories MF G and MhF G are related by the strictification functor
                                    MF G → MhF G
                                 (R, F ) 7→ (R∗ , F h ).
The ring R∗ = R[u] is obtained from R by adjoining a polynomial variable u with
|u| = 2, and F h is the unique formal power series satisfying
(11.17)                       u F h (x, y) = F (ux, ux).
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                109


The strictification of a map (f, ψ) : (R, F ) → (R′ , F ′ ) is the pair
                           (f h , ψ h ) : (R∗ , F h ) → (R∗′ , (F ′ )h )
with f h (u) = ψ ′ (0)u and ψ h (x) the unique power series satisfying u ψ h (x) = ψ(ux).
   A (left) action of a group G on a pair (R, F ) ∈ MF G is a map of monoids
                               G → MF G ((R, F ), (R, F )),
and a strict (left) action of a group on (R∗ , F ) ∈ MhF G is a map
                             G → MhF G ((R∗ , F ), (R∗ , F )).
The strictification functor converts a group action into a strict one.
   A left action of G on (R, F ) corresponds to a left action of G on R[[x]]. We will
use the notation
                                        r 7→ g r    r∈R
                                        x 7→ [g](x)
for this action.
Example 11.18. Suppose that E is a complex oriented, homotopy commutative ring
spectrum, and that a finite group G acts on E by homotopy multiplicative maps.
Let F denote the corresponding homogeneous formal group law over π∗ E. Then
the action of G on E ∗ (CP∞ ) gives a strict action of G on (π∗ E, F ).
Example 11.19. The group C2 acts on any (R, F ) ∈ MF G as the identity map on
R and formal multiplication by (−1) on F .
11.3.3. Group cohomology and the Adams-Novikov spectral sequence. When (R∗ , F )
is a homogeneous formal group law equipped with a strict action of a group G, there
is a map
                     Exts,t                        s
                         MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ) → H (G; Rt ).
Conceptually, it arises from the inclusion functor of the subcategory of MhF G whose
only object is (R∗ , F ) and whose monoid of self maps is given by the action of G.
For the purposes of explicit computation, it is conveniently described as derived
from a map of Hopf algebroids
(11.20)                  (M U∗ , M U∗ M U ) → (R∗ , C(G; R∗ )),
in which C(G; R∗ ) is the ring of (set-theoretic) functions from G to R∗ .
   The Hopf algebroid (R∗ , C(G; R∗ )) is the one expressing the group action of G
on R∗ . The “source” map
                                ηL : R∗ → C(G; R∗ )
sends r ∈ R∗ to the constant function with value r, and the “target” map ηR :
R∗ → C(G; R∗ ) is the transpose of the action mapping. It associates to r ∈ R∗ the
function sending g ∈ G to g · r. The coproduct
                        ∆ : C(G; R∗ ) → C(G; R∗ ) ⊗ C(G; R∗ )
                                                           R∗

is the composition of the map
                               C(G; R∗ ) → C(G × G, R∗ )
dual to multiplication in G, and the isomorphism
                                                      ≈
                       C(G; R∗ ) ⊗ C(G; R∗ ) −
                                             → C(G × G, R∗ )
                                   R∗
110                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


given by setting
                         (f1 ⊗ f2 )(g1 , g2 ) = f1 (g1 ) · g1 f2 (g2 ).
The map (11.20) consists of the map M U∗ → R∗ classifying the homogeneous
formal group law F , and the map M U∗ M U → C(G, R∗ ), defined by declaring the
composition
                                               evg
                         M U∗ M U → C(G, R∗ ) −−→ R∗
to be the map classifying the strict isomorphism
                                       [g](x) : F → g ∗ F.
   When the G-action on (R∗ , F ) arises, as in Example 11.18, from an action of G
on a complex oriented homotopy commutative ring spectrum E, the map (11.20)
is the E2 -term of a map of spectral sequences abutting to the homomorphism
π∗ S 0 → π∗ E hG . We couldn’t quite find this result in the literature (though [16,
Proposition 6.7] is close). To see it, let
                              C • (G; E) = MapG (EG• , E)
be the cosimplicial spectrum of G-maps from the bar construction model for EG•
into E. Thus                                 Y
                                C n (G; E) =   E
                                                     Gn
          •
and Tot C (G; E) is the homotopy fixed point spectrum E hG . The cosimplical ring
[n] 7→ π∗ C(Gn , E) is the nerve of the Hopf-algebroid (π∗ E, C(G, π∗ E)) and forms
the cobar complex for calculating H ∗ (G, π∗ E). The homotopy fixed point spectral
sequence is the homotopy spectral sequence of this cosimplicial spectrum.
   Choose a complex orientation for E, and for every n ≥ 0 let
(11.21)                      M U (n+1) → C n (G; E) ∈ ho S
be a representative of the unique homotopy class of homotopy multiplicative maps
whose restriction to the ith smash factor of M U (n+1) is the composition of the
complex orientation
                               M U → E = C 0 (G; E)
with the cosimplicial structure map C 0 (G; E) → C n (G; E) corresponding to the in-
clusion of the ith -vertex of ∆[n]. The maps (11.21) fit into a homotopy commutative
map of cosimplicial resolutions
(11.22)        S0           / MU         // M U ∧ M U      /// M U ∧ M U ∧ M U · · ·


                                                                   //        
              E hG      / C 0 (G; E)         // C 1 (G; E)                 2
                                                                        / C (G; E) · · · .
If this were an actually commutative diagram, the desired spectral sequence would
be the one derived from the induced map of “Tot towers.” Even though it is only
homotopy commutative, the fact that the top row is an M U Adams resolution and
the spectra in the bottom row are complex oriented means that it can be still be
refined to a map of towers.
    This result doesn’t quite seem to appear in the literature, though an assertion
along these lines is made in [61, pp 289-90], and the case in which M U is replaced by
En is [16, Proposition 6.2]. To spell out the details, we begin with some generalities
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               111


about the Tot tower of a cosimplical spectrum X • . Let N X n be the iterated
mapping cone of the coface maps

                         di : X n−1 → X n ,     i = 1, . . . , n.

The spectrum N X n is a retract of X n (it is split by the inclusion of the iterated
homotopy fiber of the co-degeneracy maps). By construction it depends, as a retract
of X n , functorially on X • . The spectra N X n fit into a sequence
                                     d0            d0
                              N X 0 −→ N X 1 −→ · · ·

which is a “complex” in the sense that the composition of any two maps is null
homotopic.
   The homotopy spectral sequence of the cosimplicial spectrum X • is derived from
the tower {Totn X • }. For our purposes it is easier to work with the fibers of the
map from Tot X • . Write F X 0 = Tot X • , and define F X n to be the homotopy fiber
of the map Tot X • → Totn−1 X • . Then there is a functorial fibration sequence

(11.23)               F X n → F X n−1 → Σ−(n−1) N X (n−1) .

Of course the homotopy spectral sequence can also be derived from the tower
{F X n }, for example by using it to reconstruct the Tot-tower.
   To simplify the notation, write X • = M U •+1 and Y • = C • (G; E) for the cosim-
plicial spectra occurring in the top and bottom rows of (11.22). The complex
N X • is the standard M U -Adams resolution for S 0 , and in this case the fibration
sequence (11.23) is equivalent to

                        F X n → F X n−1 → M U ∧ F X n−1 .

The consequence we need of this is the characterizing property of an Adams tower:
if R is any M U -module, then the connecting homomorphism

(11.24)                    [F X n , R] ֒→ [Σ−n−1 N X n , R]

is a monomorphism.
   Our aim is to construct a map of towers

(11.25)                         {F X n } → {F Y n }.

Suppose by induction we have produced a homotopy commutative diagram

                          F X n−1         / Σ−(n−1) N X n−1


                                                   
                          F Y n−1         / Σ−(n−1) N Y n−1 ,

and choose any map F X n → F Y n making

                      Σ−n N X n−1         / F Xn          / F X n−1

                                                              
                      Σ−n N Y n−1         / FY n          / F Y n−1
112                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


commute up to homotopy. We claim that the diagram

                               F Xn       / Σ−n N X n


                                               
                               FY n       / Σ−n N Y n .

also commutes up to homotopy. The claim completes the induction step, and
gives (11.25).
   To verify the claim, consider

(11.26)              Σ−n N X n−1        / F Xn         / Σ−n N X n

                                                            
                     Σ−n N Y n−1        / FY n         / Σ−n) N Y n .

The outermost square commutes since it is a retract of a suspension of one of
the squares in (11.22). The spectrum Σ−(n+1) N Y n+1 admits the structure of an
M U -module since it is a retract of a suspension of C n+1 (G; E) which is complex
orientable. Taking it for R in the monomorphism (11.24) shows that the commu-
tativity of the outer square in (11.26) implies the commutativity of the right hand
square. This verifies the claim.

11.3.4. The conjugation action. Applying the strictification functor to Example 11.19,
one is led to the “conjugation action” of C2 on homogeneous formal group laws over
graded rings.
   Let F be a homogeneous formal group law over a graded commutative ring R∗ ,
and c : R∗ → R∗ any ring homomorphism with the property that c : R2n → R2n
the map given by multiplication by (−1)n . The homogeneous formal group law
F c := c∗ F is given by
                              F c (x, y) = −F (−x, −y).
The power series
                                 c(x) = −[−1]F (x)
has the property that c ◦ c(x) = x and provides both a strict isomorphism F → Fc
and its inverse F c → F . These combine to give an action of C2 on (R∗ , F ) which
we call the conjugation action associated to c : R∗ → R∗ .
   The map c is completely specified on the even degree elements in R∗ and in
general there are as many conjugation actions as there are ways of extending c to
all of R∗ . In the examples of interest to us, R∗ will be evenly graded, and so there
is exactly one conjugation action.
Example 11.27. If E is a real-oriented spectrum, then the underlying C2 action
on (i∗0 E)∗ [[CP∞ ]] is the conjugation action. The case E = M UR is universal in
the sense that the map M U∗ → R∗ classifying a homogeneous formal group law is
equivariant for any choice of conjugation action.
   We now generalize Example 11.27. Let G = C2n , and give i∗1 M U ((G)) the real
orientation coming from the unit
                                M UR → i∗1 M U ((G))
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               113


of the norm-restriction adjunction on equivariant commutative algebras (Exam-
ple 5.6). Examples 11.18 and 11.27 then equip (π∗u M U ((G)) , F ) with a G-action
extending the conjugation action of C2 .
Proposition 11.28. The pair (π∗u M U ((G)), F ) equipped with its G-action is uni-
versal in the sense that map associating to a G-equivariant
(11.29)                           f : π∗u M U ((G)) → R∗ ,
the pair (R∗, f ∗ F ) with its induced G-action, is a bijection between the set of equi-
variant maps (11.29) and the set of (R∗ , F ) equipped with a G-action extending the
one on R∗ , and the conjugation action of C2 ⊂ G.

   Proof: Suppose that (R∗ , F ) is a homogeneous formal group law over a graded
ring, equipped with a G-action extending the conjugation action of C2 . Choose a
generator γ ∈ G. This data is equivalent to an isomorphism
                                        τ : F1 → F0
having the property that the composite of the chain of isomorphisms
                              τg/2−1               1     τ
                                                         0   τ
                                          → · · · −→
                        Fg/2 −−−−→ Fg/2−1 −          F1 −→ F0
                                        τi = (γ i )∗ τ
is the conjugation isomorphism c. The claim then follows from the decomposi-
tion (5.2) and the description of π∗ M U ∧ · · · ∧ M U in terms of chains of composable
strict isomorphisms.                                                                 

11.4. The fundamental representation. As described in §11.1 these ideas can
be used to construct a C8 -equivariant ring homomorphism from π∗u ΩO to much
smaller ring. Let A = Z2 [ζ] be as in §11, and Ff the Lubin-Tate formal A-module
over A associated to a power series series f (x) leading to a 2-typical formal group
law. Using ζ to identify the group of 8th -roots of unity with C8 , we get a C8 action
on (A, Ff ). From this apply the strictification functor to get a strict action of C8
on (A∗ , Ffh ). With an eye toward Proposition 11.8, we invert the class u and re-
define A∗ to be A[u, u−1 ]. The underlying C2 -action is the conjugation action, so
Proposition 11.28 provides a C8 -equivariant map
(11.30)                             π∗u M U ((C8 )) → A∗ ,
classifying (A∗ , Ffh ) with its C8 -action.
Proposition 11.31. The image of D under
                      D ∈ π19ρ M U ((C8 )) → π152
                                              u
                                                  M U ((C8 )) → A152
is a unit, hence (11.30) factors through a C8 -equivariant map
                                       π∗u ΩO → A∗ .

   Proof: We must show that the classes r1C8 , r3C4 , and r15C2
                                                                 all map to units in A∗ .
It suffices to show that they do so in A∗ /(π). By definition (§5.4.2) the image of r1C8
in A2 /(π) is the coefficient of x2 in the isomorphism of γ ∗ Ffh with the 2-typification
of Ffh . Since Ffh is already 2-typical, this is just the coefficient of x2 in the power
series [ζ]Ffh (x) in the homogeneous formal group law. By (11.15) this coefficient is
114                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


congruent to u modulo π, hence a unit. Equation (11.15) similarly shows that r3C4
                  C2
maps to u3 , and r15 to u15 modulo (π). This completes the proof.              

11.5. Technical results. In this section we describe explicitly the maps
                          j+1                                        j+1
                  Ext1,2                            2,2
                     MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → ExtA                      (Z/2, Z/2)
(11.32)                  j+1
                   Ext1,2                          1
                      MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → H (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π))
occurring in the statement of Proposition 11.13. The results are Propositions 11.36
and 11.38 below. Combined with Lemma 11.11 and Proposition 11.34 they directly
imply Proposition 11.13.
11.5.1. Preliminaries. We remind the reader that everything has been localized at
                                       (2)
the prime p = 2. The 2-typification Funiv of the universal formal group law Funiv
is classified by a map BP∗ → M U∗ . This map extends to an equivalence of Hopf
algebroids
                                       ≈
                       (BP∗ , BP∗ BP ) −
                                       → (M U∗ , M U∗ M U ),
giving an isomorphism
                                                ≈
(11.33)           Exts,t                 → Exts,t
                     BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ) −    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ).
Our proofs depend heavily on the computations in [63] and [78], which are stated
for BP . Because of the above isomorphism they apply equally well to M U .
   In order to describe explicit computations, we fix the identification
                           BP∗ BP = Z(2) [v1 , v2 , . . . , t1 , t2 , . . . ]
in which the vi are the Hazewinkel generators, and the elements ti ∈ BP∗ BP are
the coefficients of the universal isomorphism
                                 ∗     (2)          (2)
                                                     ∗            (2)
                                ηR Funiv → Funiv = ηL  Funiv
                                            XFuniv
                                                (2)
                                                         n
                                       x 7→         tn x2 .
We will not distinguish in notation between the vi and ti in BP∗ BP , and their
images in M U∗ M U .
   An important role in the proof of 11.3 is played by the element t1 . Since any
coordinate x is 2-typical modulo x3 , the class t1 is also given by the coefficient of
                              ∗              ∗
the universal isomorphism of ηR Funiv with ηL  Funiv
                                     x 7→ x + t1 x2 + · · · .
With the standard conventions this is the inverse of the universal strict isomorphism
                                       ∗           ∗
over π∗ M U ∧ M U , which goes from ηL   Funiv to ηR Funiv .
11.5.2. The Adams-Novikov 2-line. Let
                    j+1                                        j+1
          δ2 : Ext1,2                       → Ext2,2
                  MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) −    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ) and
                    j+1                                              j+1
          δ1 : Ext0,2                       ∞
                                                 → Ext1,2
                  MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2, v1 )) −    MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2))
be the connecting homomorphisms associated to the short exact sequences of M U∗ M U
co-modules
                                          2
                           0 → M U∗ −
                                    → M U∗ → M U∗ /(2) → 0
                    0 → M U∗ /2 → v1−1 M U∗ → M U∗ /(2, v1∞ ) → 0.
                                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                                        115


Our description of the maps (11.32) relies on the following computation, whose
proof is discussed in §11.6. We employ the standard “cobar construction” notation
for elements (see, for example, [71, Definition A1.2.11]).
                                                                                                            j+1
Proposition 11.34 ([63, 78]). For j > 1, the Z/2-vector space Ext1,2
                                                                 MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2))
has a basis consisting of the elements,
                                                      j                    j
                                                  v12 −1 [t1 ], v12 −2 [t21 ]
and the image under δ1 of certain elements of the form
                              k         k                     j+1
                           v2s2 /v12 ∈ Ext0,2                       ∞
                                          MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2, v1 )),

with s odd.                                                                                                                
  We will also need
Lemma 11.35. For k ≥ 2 the connecting homomorphisms δ1 and δ2 satisfy the
following congruences modulo the ideal (2, v12 ):
                                                  k           k           (s−1)2k      k+1
                                        δ1 (v2s2 /v12 ) ≡ v2                        [t21     ]
                                                          k
                                               δ2 v12 [t1 ] ≡ 0
                                                          k
                                               δ2 v12 [t21 ] ≡ 0
                                                  k           k           (s−1)2k      k     k
                                   δ2 δ1 (v2s2 /v12 ) ≡ v2                          [t21 |t21 ].


   Proof: This is a straightforward (and long-known) computation using the struc-
ture formulae
                                  ηR (v1 ) = v1 + 2t1
                                  ηR (v2 ) ≡ v2 + v1 t21 + v12 t1                      mod 2.
The assertion about δ1 is easy to check. The structure formulae imply that ηR (v12 ) ≡
                                                                                     k
v12 modulo 4, so one may work modulo (4, v12 ) when computing δ2 . The terms v12 [t1 ]
       k
and v12 [t21 ] are already in this ideal, giving the first two assertions about δ2 . The
last makes use of the congruences
                                                k+1                  k     k
                                        δ2 [t21           ] ≡ [t21 |t21 ] mod 2
                                              ηR v24i ≡ v24i              mod (4, v12 ).
Since s is odd and k ≥ 1, (s − 1)2k is divisible by 4. This means that
          (s−1)2k      k+1                  (s−1)2k                 k+1         (s−1)2k          k   k
     δ2 (v2         [t21     ]) ≡ v2                  δ2 ([t21            ]) ≡ v2            [t21 |t21 ] mod (2, v12 ).
This completes the proof.                                                                                                  

11.5.3. The proof of Proposition 11.13. Given Lemma 11.11 and Proposition 11.34,
Proposition 11.13 is an immediate consequence of the two results below.
Proposition 11.36. For j > 1, the map
                                  j+1                                                 j+1
                     Ext1,2                        2,2
                        MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ ) → ExtA                                        (Z/2, Z/2).
116                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is given by
                                     j
                                   v12 −1 [t1 ] 7→ 0
                                     j
                                   v12 −2 [t21 ] 7→ 0
                                      k        k
                               δ1 (v2s2 /v12 ) 7→ 0             (s > 1)
                                   j−1  j−1
                            δ1 (v22 /v12 ) 7→ h2j .

  Proof: This follows directly from Lemma 11.35 and the fact that the map from
M U∗ M U to the dual Steenrod algebra given by
                                          vi 7→ 0
                                          ti 7→ χ(ξi )2 .
                                                                                    

Remark 11.37. The map from the Adams-Novikov E2 -term to the classical Adams
E2 -term has been completely determined for s ≤ 2 and all t. For a comprehensive
discussion, the reader is referred to [71, Chapter 5].
   We next turn to the second map in Proposition 11.13. When j > 2 the action
of C8 on A2j+1 is trivial, and the group H 1 (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π)) is cyclic of order two,
                                                                             j
generated by the cohomology class of the cocycle whose value on γ is u2 . Let us
denote this class υ.
Proposition 11.38. For j > 2, the map
                      j+1
                Ext1,2                          1
                   MU∗ MU (M U∗ , M U∗ /(2)) → H (C8 ; A2j+1 /(π)).
is given by
                                     j
                                   v12 −1 [t1 ] 7→ 0
                                     j
                                   v12 −2 [t21 ] 7→ 0
                                      k        k
                               δ1 (v2s2 /v12 ) 7→ 0             (s > 1)
                                   j−1  j−1
                            δ1 (v22 /v12 ) 7→ υ.

  Proof: Let ν be the valuation on A normalized so that ν(π) = 1. Since ν(2) = 4,
                                                   4
                             [2]Ffh (x) ≡ x2 + · · ·        mod π,
and v1 and v2 both map to zero in A∗ /(π). This gives the first line, and makes the
second a consequence of Lemma 11.35. Lemma 11.35 also gives the identity
                                           j           j    j
                                   δ1 (v22 /v12 ) = [t21 ],
                                     j         j
so to determine the image of δ1 (v22 /v12 ) we need to work out the image of t1 under
the map of Hopf-algebroids
(11.39)            (M U∗ , M U∗ M U ) → (A∗ /(π), C(C8 , A∗ /(π))).
As explained at the end of 11.5.1, the element t1 occurs as the coefficient of x2 the
              ∗ (2)        (2)
isomorphism ηR  Funiv → Funiv , inverse to the universal strict isomorphism. Since
we have chosen a 2-typical coordinate on Ffh , the element t1 is therefore sent, under
                                    KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                              117


the map of Hopf-algebroids (11.39), to the 1-cocycle on C8 whose value on γ is the
coefficient of x2 in the inverse of the power series [ζ](x). By (11.15) and the formula
                                        j     j
for strictification (11.17) this is −u2 ≡ u2 modulo (π).                             

11.6. Addendum. Lemma 11.11 and Proposition 11.34 do not quite appear liter-
ature in a readily accessible form, and the purpose of this addendum is to outline
their proofs, explaining how the key points can be read off from the results of [63]
and [78]. To conform with the notation of these references, we will use BP rather
that M U in this section.
   The paper [63] introduced the chromatic approach to studying the groups
                                        Exts,∗
                                           BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ).

The computation begins with the fact that for s > 0 one has
                                  Exts,∗
                                     BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ) ⊗ Q = 0.

This means that the connecting homomorphism
                            j+1                                      j+1
                      Ext1,2                 ∞       2,2
                         BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ /2 ) → ExtBP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ )

is an isomorphism. The assertion of Proposition 11.34 is that the map
                           j+1                                 j+1
                     Ext1,2                        1,2                 ∞
                        BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ /2) → ExtBP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ /2 )

induced by the inclusion
                                                1/2
                                        BP∗ /2 −−→ BP∗ /2∞
is surjective, and that the left had group is spanned by the elements listed. Con-
tinuing with the chromatic approach, one is led to the following diagram (in which,
to manage the size, we have abbreviated Exts,t                        s,t
                                              BP∗ BP (BP∗ , M ) to Ext (M ))
(11.40)
                                   δ1
  Ext0,2
        j+1
               (BP∗ /(2, v1∞ ))          / Ext1,2j+1 (BP /(2))              / Ext1,2j+1 (v −1 BP /(2))
                                                           ∗                                1       ∗
                 _

                                                                                         
 Ext 0,2j+1
              (BP∗ /(2∞ , v1∞ ))        / Ext1,2j+1 (BP /(2∞ ))            / Ext1,2j+1 (v −1 BP /(2∞ )) .
                                                       ∗                                1       ∗


The rightmost column is analyzed using the Miller-Ravenel change of rings theorem
(see [62] or [71, Chapter 6, §1]) which identifies it with the map
                       H 1 (Z×          ±1          1  ×          ±1    ∞
                             2 ; Z(2) [v1 ]/(2)) → H (Z2 ; Z(2) [v1 ]/(2 ))

in which λ ∈ Z×    2 acts on v1 with eigenvalue λ. This is easily calculated, and
                                                                j+1
one finds that the map is indeed surjective, and that Ext1,2                −1
                                                             BP∗ BP (BP∗ , v1 BP∗ /(2))
                                                   j−1            j−2
has dimension 2, with basis the image of v12 [t1 ] and v12 [t21 ]. This reduces
Proposition 11.34 to the assertion that the left vertical arrow is surjective (hence
an isomorphism), and that the upper left group has a basis consisting of the elements
                k    k
of the form v2s2 /v12 . For this one first appeals to the invariant prime ideal theorem
([66, 44], or see [71, Theorem 4.3.2]) for the fact that
                           Ext0,∗
                              BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ /(2, v1 )) = Z/2[v2 ].
118                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


It follows that any invariant element in BP∗ BP/(2∞ , v1∞ ) has the form
                                         k
                                      v2s2 + r
(11.41)
                                       v1ℓ 2i+1
with r ∈ (2, v1 ) ⊂ BP∗ . We now come to the key point. It turns out that a
necessary (but not sufficient) condition that such an element to be invariant is that
the indices satisfy the inequality
(11.42)                          ℓ ≤ 2k−i + 2k−i−1 .
This can be extracted from the stronger conditions of [78, Theorem 3.3], in which
                                                                  n
the symbol xn is an explicitly defined element, congruent to v22 modulo (2, v1 )
                                                        i
and yi is an explicitly defined element congruent to v12 modulo 2. From (11.42)
it follows that for an element of the form (11.41) to be invariant and have degree
2j+1 , the numbers i, j, k, and ℓ must satisfy
                      6s2k − 2(2k−i + 2k−i−1 ) ≤ 2j+1 ≤ 6s2k .
Expanding, and dividing both sides by 2k+1 gives
                          3s − 2−i − 2−i−1 ≤ 2j−k ≤ 3s.
Since s ≥ 1 and i ≥ 0, one has
                         3s − 2−i − 2−i−1 ≥ 3s − 3/2 > 1,
and so k < j. This implies 2j−k is even, and so must equal 3s − 1. This in turn
means that 2−i + 2−i−1 > 1, and so i must be 0.
   It thus follows from the inequality (11.42) that the invariant elements of degree
2j+1 in BP∗ /(2∞ , v1∞ ) have the form
                                         k
                                      v2s2 + r
                                            k  .
                                         v12 2
Thus the left vertical map in (11.40) is surjective. Since
                                             k
                                        v2s2
                                           k
                                        v12 2
is already invariant, a simple induction shows that the elements stated form a basis.

      Appendix A. The category of equivariant orthogonal spectra
   In this appendix we recall the definition and some basic properties of the theory
of equivariant orthogonal spectra. For further details and references the reader is
referred to Mandell-May [53] and to Mandell-May-Schwede-Shipley [54].
   One of the reasons we have chosen to use equivariant orthogonal spectra is that
it has many convenient category theoretic properties. These are independent of
the homotopy theory of equivariant orthogonal spectra, and so we make two passes
through the theory, one focused on the category theory, and the other on the
homotopy theory.
   Our main new innovation is the theory of the norm (§A.4). Most of the category
theoretic aspects apply to any symmetric monoidal category, and things work out
much cleaner at that level of generality.
A.1. Category theory preliminaries.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                  119


A.1.1. Symmetric monoidal categories.
Definition A.1. A symmetric monoidal category is a category V equipped with a
functor
                             ⊗ : V × V → V,
a unit object 1 ∈ V, a natural associativity isomorphism
                         aABC : (A ⊗ B) ⊗ C ≈ A ⊗ (B ⊗ C)
a natural commutativity isomorphism
                                sAB : A ⊗ B ≈ B ⊗ A
and a unit isomorphism
                                    ιA : 1 ⊗ A ≈ A.
This data is required to satisfy the associative and commutative coherence axioms,
as well as the strict symmetry axiom.
   The two coherence axioms express that all of the ways one might get from one
iterated tensor product to another using the associativity and commutativity trans-
formations coincide. The strict symmetry axiom is that the square of the commu-
tativity transformation is the identity map. See [51], or Borceux [12, §6.1].
   Even though it requires six pieces of data to specify a symmetric monoidal cat-
egory we will usually indicate one with a triple V = (V0 , ⊗, 1).
   A symmetric monoidal category is closed if for each A, the functor A ⊗ ( − ) has
a right adjoint ( − )A , which one can think of as an “internal hom.” Note that
                                 V(1, X A ) ≈ V(A, X)
so that one can recover the usual hom from the internal hom.

A.1.2. Sifted colimits, commutative and associative algebras. In a closed symmetric
monoidal category, the monoidal product commutes with colimits in each variable.
It follows easily that the iterated monoidal product
                                      X 7→ X ⊗n
commutes with all colimits over indexing categories I for which the diagonal I → I n
is final in the sense of [51, §IX.3]. If I → I × I is final, then for all n ≥ 2, I → I n
is also final.
Definition A.2. A category I is sifted the diagonal embedding I → I × I is final.
    Equivalently (see [25, 15.2 (c)], or [2, Theorem 2.15]), a small category I is sifted
if and only if the formation of colimits over I in sets commutes with finite products.
Definition A.3. A sifted colimit is a colimit over a sifted category.
   Examples of sifted colimits include reflexive coequalizers and directed colimits.
In fact the class of sifted colimits is essentially the smallest class of colimits con-
taining reflexive coequalizers and directed colimits. See, for example [1, 25].
   Let V = (V0 , ⊗, 1) be a closed symmetric monoidal category.
Definition A.4. An associative algebra in V is an object A equipped with a mul-
tiplication map A ⊗ A → A which is unital and associative. A commutative algebra
is an associative algebra for which the multiplication map is commutative.
120                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The categories of associative and commutative algebras (and algebra maps) in
V are denoted ass V and comm V, respectively.
   The following straightforward result holds more generally for algebras over any
operad. The existence of colimits in the algebra categories is proved by expressing
any algebra as a reflexive coequalizer of a diagram of free algebras. There is an
even more general result for algebras over a triple [12, Proposition 4.3.1]
Proposition A.5. Suppose that V is a closed symmetric monoidal category. The
forgetful functors
                                      ass V → V
                                    comm V → V


create limits. If V is cocomplete these functors have left adjoints
                                          a
                           X 7→ T (X) =       X ⊗n
                                             n≥0
                                               a
                           X 7→ Sym(X) =             X ⊗n /Σn ,
                                               n≥0

the categories ass V and comm V are cocomplete, and the “free” functors above
commute with all sifted colimits.                                          
  A left module over an associative algebra A is an object M equipped with a
unital and associative left multiplication
                                    A ⊗ M → M.
Similarly a right module is an object N equipped with a unital, associative right
multiplication N ⊗ A → N . Given a left A-module M and a right A-module N one
defines N ⊗ M by the (reflexive) coequalizer
           A

                         N ⊗ A ⊗ M ⇒ N ⊗ M → N ⊗ M.
                                                           A

When A is commutative, a left A-module can be regarded as a right A-module by
the action
                                      flip
                              M ⊗ A −−→ A ⊗ M → M.
Using this, the formation M ⊗ N makes the category of left A-modules into a
                                A
symmetric monoidal category.

A.1.3. Enriched categories. In this section we briefly describe the basic notions of
enriched categories.. The reader is referred to [40] or [12, Ch. 6] for further details.
  Suppose that V = (V0 , ⊗, 1) is a symmetric monoidal category.
Definition A.6. A V-category C consists of a collection ob C called the objects
of C, for each pair X, Y ∈ ob C a morphism object C(X, Y ) ∈ ob V0 , for each X
an identity morphism 1 → C(X, X) and for each triple X, Y, Z of objects of C a
composition law
                         C(Y, Z) ⊗ C(X, Y ) → C(X, Z).
This data is required to satisfy the evident unit and associativity properties.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                121


   As is customary, we write X ∈ C rather than X ∈ ob C. Most of the notions
of ordinary category theory carry through in the context of enriched categories,
once formulated without reference to “elements” of mapping objects. For example
a functor F : C → D of V-categories consists of a function
                                    F : ob C → ob D
and for each pair of objects X, Y ∈ C a V-morphism
                             F : C(X, Y ) → D(F X, F Y )
compatible with the unit and composition. A natural transformation between two
functors F and G is a function assigning to each X ∈ C a map TX : 1 → D(F X, GX)
which for every X, Y makes the diagram
                                       TY ⊗F
(A.7)                    C(X, Y )                 / D(F Y, GY ) ⊗ D(F X, F Y )

                             G⊗TX
                                                                
              D(GX, GY ) ⊗ D(F X, GX)                     / D(F X, GY )

commute.
   There is an ordinary category C0 underlying the enriched category C. The objects
of C0 are the objects of C, and one defines
                             C0 (X, Y ) = V0 (1, C(X, Y )).
If V itself underlies a W-enriched category, then any V-category C has an underlying
W-category, whose underlying ordinary category is C0 .
   When V is a closed symmetric monoidal category, the internal hom defines an
enrichment of V over itself, with underlying category V0 .
   When V is closed, a natural transformation F → G can be described as a map
                                      Y
                                1→       D(F X, GX)
                                      X∈C

which equalizes the two arrows
                   Y                Y
(A.8)                  D(F X, GX) ⇒   D(F X, GY )C(X,Y ) .
                   X∈C                   X,Y ∈C

describing the two ways of going around (A.7).
   We will write CatV for the 2-category of V-categories, and denote the category of
enriched functors C → D as CatV (C, D)0 . When V is closed and contains products
indexed by the collection of pairs of objects of C, the category CatV (C, D)0 underlies
an enriched category CatV (C, D) in which the object of natural transformations from
F to G is given by the equalizer of (A.8).

A.2. Equivariant orthogonal spectra.

A.2.1. Equivariant spaces. Let T be the category of pointed, compactly generated
weak Hausdorff spaces (in the sense of [59]). The category T is symmetric monoidal
under the smash product, with unit S 0 . A topological category is a category enriched
over (T , ∧, S 0 ).
122                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Remark A.9. Working with compactly generated weak Hausdorff spaces has many
benefits, but it does create some technical issue. Colimits are computed by forming
the colimit in topological spaces, replacing the topology by the compactly generated
topology, and then forming the universal quotient which is weak Hausdorff. This
last step can alter the underlying point set. It does not, however, in the case of
pushouts along closed inclusion. More precisely, given a pushout diagram
                                       A            /X

                                                     
                                       B            /Y
of topological spaces in which A → X is a closed inclusion, if A, X, and B are
compactly generated and weak Hausdorff then so is Y . This follows from [59,
Proposition 2.5] and the remark about adjunction spaces immediately preceding
its statement. Among other things this means that the smash product of two
compactly generated weak Hausdorff spaces can be computed as the smash product
of the underlying compactly generated spaces.
   Now suppose that G is a group. Let (T G , ∧, S 0 ) be the topological symmetric
monoidal category of pointed spaces with a left G-action and spaces of equivariant
maps. With this structure T G is a closed symmetric monoidal category, with
internal mapping spaces T G (X, Y ) = Y X given by the space of non-equivariant
maps, with the conjugation action of G.
   A word about notation. The expression “category of G-spaces” can reasonably
refer to three objects, depending on what is meant by a map. It can be an ordinary
category, a category enriched over topological spaces, or a category in which the
hom objects are the G-spaces of non-equivariant maps. As indicated above we will
use T G to denote the category enriched over G-spaces, with T G (X, Y ) denoting the
G-space of non-equivariant maps, and T G for the topological category of G-spaces,
and spaces of equivariant maps.
   We will be making use of categories enriched over T G . As in [53], we will refer to
them as topological G-categories (or just G-categories for short). Let CatG denote
the collection of topological G-categories, and write CatG (C, D) for the enriched
category of functors and left G-spaces of natural transformations. The symbol
CatG (C, D)G will denote the topological category of functors and spaces of equi-
variant natural transformations.

A.2.2. Change of group. Suppose that H ⊂ G is a subgroup. The restriction func-
tor
                                  TG →TH
has continuous left and a right adjoints given by
                                  Y 7→ G+ ∧ Y
                                                H
                                            H
                                  Y 7→ T        (G+ , Y ).
These two constructions are basic examples of indexed monoidal products (see
§A.3). Because T G is pointed there is a canonical equivariant map
                               G+ ∧ Y → T H (G+ , Y ).
                                   H
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               123


A.2.3. The basic indexing categories. For a real orthogonal representation V of G
let O(V ) be the orthogonal group of non-equivariant linear isometric maps V → V .
The group G acts on O(V ) by conjugation, and the group of fixed points is the
orthogonal group of equivariant maps. Given orthogonal representations V and
W , we define O(V, W ) to be the Stiefel manifold of linear isometric embeddings
of V into W , with the conjugation action of G. The G fixed points in O(V, W )
are the equivariant orthogonal embeddings. The group O(W ) acts transitively on
O(V, W ) on the left. A choice of embedding V → W identifies O(V, W ) with the
homogeneous space O(W )/O(W − V ).
Definition A.10. The category JG is the topological G-category whose objects
are finite dimensional real orthogonal representations of G, and with morphism
G-space JG (V, W ) the Thom complex
                      JG (V, W ) = Thom(O(V, W ); W − V )
of the “complementary bundle” W − V over O(V, W ).
  We will denote the topological category underlying JG with the symbol J G .
Thus J G (V, W ) = JG (V, W )G .
  The G-space JG (V, W ) can be thought of as the topologically indexed wedge
                                   _
                                       S W −V .
                                   V →W
When dim W < dim V it reduces to the one point space ∗. When dim W ≥ dim V
one can get a convenient description by choosing an orthogonal G-representation U
with dim U + dim V = dim W (for example the trivial representation). With this
choice one has
                      JG (V, W ) ≈ O(V ⊕ U, W )+ ∧ S U .
                                                      O(U)
                                    G
  The fixed point space JG (V, W )      is given by
(A.11)             JG (V, W ) = J (V G , W G ) ∧ O(V ⊥ , W ⊥ )G
                             G
                                                              +,

in which V G denotes space of invariant vectors in V , and V ⊥ its orthogonal com-
plement. The space O(V ⊥ , W ⊥ )G in turn decomposes into the product
                                  Y
                                     O(Vα , Wα )
                                   α
in which α is running through the set of non-trivial irreducible representations of
G, and Vα ⊂ V and Wα ⊂ W indicate the α-isotypical parts.
   When G is the trivial group we will denote the category JG simply by J . For
any G there is an inclusion J ⊂ JG identifying J with the full subcategory of
objects with trivial G-action. There is also a forgetful functor JG → J which
refines in the evident manner to a functor from JG to the G-category of objects
in J equipped with a G-action. One can easily check that this is an equivalence.
For later reference, we single this statement out.
Proposition A.12. The forgetful functor described above gives an equivalence of
JG with the topological G-category of objects in J equipped with a G-action.
Passage to fixed points gives an equivalence of J G with the topological category of
objects in J equipped with a G-action.                                            
   Proposition A.12 plays an important role in establishing one of the basic prop-
erties of the norm (Proposition A.59).
124                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


A.2.4. Orthogonal spectra.
Definition A.13. An orthogonal G-spectrum is a functor
                                      JG → T G
of topological G-categories.
  Informally, an orthogonal spectrum X consists of a collection of spaces {XV },
and for each V → W a
                              S W −V ∧ XV → XW .
These maps are required to be compatible with composition in JG , the action of
G, and to vary continuously in V → W . More formally, one has equivariant maps
                         Thom(O(V, W ); S W −V ) ∧ XV → XW
compatible with composition.
Definition A.14. The topological G-category of orthogonal G-spectra is the cate-
gory
                               SG = CatG (JG , T G ).
                               ¯
The (topological) category of G-spectra is
                                SG = CatG (JG , T G )G .
  We will use the notation
                                 S = CatG (J , T )
to denote the category SG for the case of the trivial group.
                       ¯
   The (G-)category of orthogonal G-spectra is complete and cocomplete (in the
sense of enriched categories). Both limits and colimits in SG are computed object-
wise:
                             (lim X α )V = lim XVα
                              −→           −→
                             (lim X α )V = lim XVα .
                              ←−           ←−
  Certain orthogonal G-spectra play a fundamental role. For V ∈ JG let
                                   S −V : JG → T G
be the functor co-represented by V . By the Yoneda lemma
                               SG (S −V , X) = XV .
                               ¯
For a pointed G-space A let S −V ∧ A be the orthogonal G-spectrum with
                                               
                          S −V ∧ A W = S −V W ∧ A.
Again, by Yoneda,
                          SG (S −V ∧ A, X) = T G (A, XV ).
                          ¯
It also follows from the Yoneda lemma that every X is functorially expressed as a
reflexive coequalizer
                  _                             _
(A.15)               S −W ∧ JG (V, W ) ∧ XV ⇒      S −V ∧ XV → X.
                V,W                                V

We call this the tautological presentation of X and for ease of typesetting, sometimes
indicate it as
(A.16)                           X = lim S −V ∧ XV .
                                     −→
                                       V
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                   125


A.2.5. Smash product. The symmetric monoidal structures on JG and T G combine
to give SG a symmetric monoidal structure (the Day convolution), denoted ∧. The
smash product of two orthogonal G-spectra X and Y is defined to be the left Kan
extension of
                     (V, W ) 7→ XV ∧ YW : JG × JG → T G
along the map
                                JG × JG → JG
sending (V, W ) to V ⊕ W . The smash product is thus characterized by the fact
that it commutes with enriched colimits in both variables, and satisfies
                             S −V ∧ S −W = S −(V ⊕W ) .
In terms of the tautological presentations
                                X = lim S −V ∧ XV
                                    −→
                                       V
                                Y = lim S −W ∧ YW
                                    −→
                                      W
one has
                     X ∧ Y = lim S −V ∧ XV ∧ Y
                             −→
                               V
                            = lim S −V ∧ XV ∧ lim S −W ∧ YW
                              −→              −→
                               V                      W
                                      −V ⊕W
                            = lim S           ∧ XV ∧ YW .
                              −→
                               V,W

The above expression is, of course, an abbreviation for the reflexive coequalizer
diagram
    _
        JG (V0 , V1 ) ∧ JG (W0 , W1 ) ∧ S −V1 ⊕W1 ∧ XV0 ∧ YW0
  V0 ,V1 ,
  W0 ,W1
                                                              _
                                                          ⇒         S −V ⊕W ∧ XV ∧ YW .
                                                              V,W

Proposition A.17. The category SG is a closed symmetric monoidal category with
respect to ∧.                                                               
   Smashing the tautological presentation of a general spectrum X with S −V gives
a presentation of S −V ∧ X as a (reflexive) coequalizer
       _                                       _
           JG (W0 , W1 ) ∧ S −V ⊕W1 ∧ XW0 ⇒       S −V ⊕W ∧ XW → S −V ∧ X.
     W0 ,W1                                       W
                                                 −V
This is not the tautological presentation of S        ∧ X, but from it, one can read off
the formula of the following lemma
Lemma A.18. If dim W < dim V , then (S −V ∧ X)W = ∗. If dim W ≥ dim V ,
then there is a natural isomorphism of G-spaces
                     (S −V ∧ X)W ≈ O(V ⊕ U, W )+ ∧ XU
                                                          O(U)

where U is any orthogonal G-representation with
                             dim U + dim V = dim W.
126                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


                                                                                        
A.2.6. Variations on the indexing category. There is a lot of flexibility in defining
SG . In this section we describe a variation which is especially convenient for certain
category theoretical properties, and will be used in our construction of the norm.
We learned of the result below from Lars Hesselholt and Mark Hovey. It is due to
Mandell-May ([53, Lemma V.1.5]).
Proposition A.19. Let i : J → JG be the inclusion of the full subcategory of
trivial G-representations. The functors
                          i∗ : CatG (JG , T G ) → CatG (J, T G )
and
                        i! : CatG (J, T G ) → CatG (JG , T G )
given by restriction and left Kan extension along i are inverse equivalences of en-
riched symmetric monoidal categories.
   In other words the symmetric monoidal (topological) category SG can simply be
regarded as the symmetric monoidal (topological) category of objects in S equipped
with a G-action.
   The proof of Proposition A.19 requires a simple technical lemma ([53, Lemma V.1.1]).
Lemma A.20. Suppose that V and W are orthogonal G-representations with
dim V = dim W . Then for any U
           O(V, U ) × O(V ) × O(W, V ) ⇒ O(V, U ) × O(W, V ) → O(W, U )
is a (reflexive) coequalizer in T G .

   Proof: Since the forgetful functor T G → T preserves colimits and reflects isomor-
phisms, it suffices to prove the result in T , where it is obvious, since the coequalizer
diagram can be split by choosing an orthogonal (non-equivariant) isomorphism of
V with W .                                                                             

   Proof of Proposition A.19: Since i : J → JG is fully faithful, the left Kan
extension i! is fully faithful (see for example, [51, Corollary X.3]). To show that it
is essentially surjective, let W ∈ JG be any object, and let V ∈ J be a vector
space of the same dimension as W . Define X by the coequalizer
               (O(W, V ) × O(V ))+ ∧ S −V ⇒ O(W, V )+ ∧ S −V → X.
Since JG (W, V ) = O(W, V ), i∗ X is given by the coequalizer of
         (JG (W, V ) × JG (V, V ))+ ∧ S −V ⇒ JG (W, V )+ ∧ S −V → i∗ X.
There is thus a natural map
(A.21)                                  i∗ X → S −W .
Evaluating at U ∈ JG and using Lemma A.20 shows that (A.21) is an isomorphism.
Thus S −W is in the image of i∗ . It then follows easily that i∗ is essentially surjective.
   Finally, the fact that i∗ is symmetric monoidal is immediate from the fact that
left Kan extensions commute. It follows that i∗ is as well, since it is the inverse
equivalence.                                                                             
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                127


A.2.7. Equivariant commutative and associative algebras. Using the notions de-
scribed in §A.1.2 one can transport many algebraic structures to SG using the
symmetric monoidal smash product.
Definition A.22. A G-equivariant commutative (associative) algebra is a commu-
tative (associative) algebra with unit in SG .
   The conventions of §A.1.2 would dictate that we refer to the topological categories
of G-equivariant commutative and associative algebras as comm SG and ass SG . To
ease some of the typesetting it will be convenient to employ the slightly abbreviated
notation
                               CommG = comm SG
                                   AlgG = ass SG ,
and to write CommG and AlgG for the corresponding G-equivariant topological
categories of not necessarily equivariant algebra maps.
   Since SG is a closed symmetric monoidal category under ∧, Proposition A.5
implies that both CommG and AlgG are complete and cocomplete, and that the
forgetful functors
                                   CommG → SG
                                      AlgG → SG
create enriched limits, sifted colimits, and have left adjoints
                               Sym : SG → CommG
                                  T : SG → AlgG .
   Similarly, there are categories of left and right modules over an associative alge-
bra A. We will use the symbol MA for the category of left A-modules. As described
in §A.1.1, when A is commutative, the category MA inherits a symmetric monoidal
product M ∧ N defined by the reflexive coequalizer diagram
            A
                         M ∧ A ∧ N ⇒ M ∧ N → M ∧ N.
                                                        A

A.3. Indexed monoidal products.
A.3.1. Covering categories and fiberwise constructions. We begin with an example.
Suppose that (C, ⊗, 1) is a symmetric monoidal category and that I is a finite
set. Write C I for the I-fold product of copies of C. For notational purposes, and
subsequent generalization it will be useful to think of an object of C I as a functor
X : I → C, with I regarded as a category with no non-identity morphisms. The
iterated monoidal product                  O
                                   ⊗I X =      Xi
                                            i∈I
defines a functor
                                    ⊗I : C I → C.
The functor ⊗I is natural in isomorphisms in I (this is just the symmetry of the
symmetric monoidal structure). In this section we make use of the notion of a
covering category to exploit this naturality in a systematic way.
   Let Setsiso be the groupoid of sets and isomorphisms. Suppose that J is a
category, and that P : J → Setsiso is a functor with the property that each P j is
128                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


finite. Then P defines a J-diagram of finite sets, and the iterated monoidal product
defines for each j a functor
(A.23)                             ⊗P j : C P j → C.
These vary functorially in j. This functoriality is expressed most cleanly using the
Grothendieck construction [28, §VI.8] (see also [38, §B.1], or [50, p. 44] where the
special case in which Cat is replaced with Sets is attributed to Yoneda).
  Suppose that J is a category, and that P : J → Cat is a functor. The Grothendieck
construction associates to P the category
                                          Z
                                      I= P

of pairs (j, s) with j ∈ J and s ∈ P (j). The set of maps from (j, s) to (j ′ , s′ ) is
the set of pairs (f, h) with f : j → j ′ a map in J, and h : P f (s) → s′ a map in
P j ′ . By regarding a finite set as a category with no non-identity morphisms the
Grothendieck construction also applies to functors P : J → Setsiso .
    A functor p : I → J arises from the Grothendieck construction of P : J → Setsiso
if and only if it is satisfies the following two conditions
       i) for every morphism f : i → j in J, and every a ∈ I with pa = i, there is a
          unique morphism g with domain a, and with pg = f ;
      ii) for every morphism f : i → j in J, and every b ∈ I with pb = j, there is a
          unique morphism g with range b, and with pg = f .
If p : I → J satisfies the above conditions, then j 7→ p−1 (j) defines a functor
                                 p−1 : J → Setsiso .
This structure is analogous to the notion of a covering space, and we name it
accordingly.
Definition A.24. A functor I → J satisfying properties i) and ii) above is called
a covering category.
   A covering category p : I → J in which each of the fibers p−1 (j) is finite will be
called a finite covering category.
   The aggregate of the functors (A.23) is a functor
                                    p⊗   I
                                     ∗ :C →C
                                             J


given in terms of p by
                                             O
                                p⊗
                                 ∗ X(j) =            X(i).
                                            p(i)=j

We will have much more to say about this in the next few sections. For now we
focus on the general process that led to its construction.
   Suppose we are given a formation of a category depending functorially on a set
I, or in other words a functor
                                 C : Setsiso → Cat.
Given a covering category p : I → J let CI → J be the category obtained by
applying the Grothendieck construction to the composite
                                                C
                                 J → Setsiso −
                                             → Cat
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                129


in which the first functor is the one classifying I → J. Let C(p) be the category of
sections of CI → J. We will say that C(p) is constructed from C by working fiber-
wise. For example the category constructed from C(S) = C S by working fiberwise
is C I . The category constructed from the constant functor C ′ (S) = C is C J .
   A natural transformation C → C ′ leads, via the same process, to a functor
C(p) → C ′ (p) which we will also describe as being constructed by working fiberwise.
A.3.2. Indexed monoidal products. When (C, ⊗, 1) is a symmetric monoidal cate-
gory, the diagram category C I can be regarded as a symmetric monoidal category
using the objectwise monoidal structure.
Definition A.25. Let p : I → J be a finite covering category and (C, ⊗, 1) a sym-
metric monoidal category. The indexed monoidal product (along p) is the functor
                                    p⊗   I
                                     ∗ :C →C
                                             J

constructed fiberwise from the iterated monoidal product.
   For some purposes the notation X ⊗(I/J) is preferable to p⊗ ∗ X. When J is the
one point G-set this can be further abbreviated to X ⊗I . We use this alternate
notation systematically when ⊗ is the smash product ∧.
   The properties of iterated monoidal products listed in the following proposition
are straightforward.
Proposition A.26. The functor ⊗I : C I → C is symmetric monoidal. If
                                     ⊗ : C2 → C
commutes with colimits in each variable then so does ⊗I . In this situation ⊗I
commutes with sifted colimits.                                               
  Applying Proposition A.26 fiberwise to a finite covering category p : I → J gives
Proposition A.27. The indexed monoidal product p⊗         I
                                                    ∗ : C → C
                                                                  J
                                                                    is symmetric
monoidal. If
                                   ⊗ : C2 → C
commutes with colimits in each variable then p⊗
                                              ∗ commutes with sifted colimits. 

Remark A.28. Though it plays no role in this paper, it can be useful to observe
that the class of colimits preserved by p⊗
                                         ∗ is slightly larger than the class of sifted
colimits. For example p⊗∗ will commute with objectwise reflexive coequalizers, which
are diagrams of the form
                                    X⇒Y →Z
with the property that for each j ∈ J there is a map Y j → Xj completing
                                     Xj ⇒ Y j
to a reflexive coequalizer diagram. The maps Y j → Xj are not required to be
natural in j.
  The following is also straightforward
Proposition A.29. Suppose that p : I → J and q : J → K are covering categories.
Then q ◦ p is a covering category, which is finite if p and q are. In that case there
is a natural isomorphism
                                q∗⊗ ◦ p⊗          ⊗
                                       ∗ ≈ (q ◦ p)∗ .
130                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


arising from the symmetric monoidal structure. This natural isomorphism is com-
patible with composition in the sense that if
                                      p           q        r
                                   I−
                                    →J −
                                       →K−
                                         →L
is a composition of finite covering categories categories, the diagram
                           r∗⊗ ◦ q∗⊗ ◦ p⊗
                                        ∗
                                                        / r∗⊗ ◦ (q ◦ p)⊗
                                                                       ∗


                                                                 
                           (r ◦ q)⊗    ⊗
                                  ∗ ◦ p∗
                                                         / (r ◦ q ◦ p)⊗
                                                                      ∗

(in which the associativity isomorphisms have been suppressed) commutes.               
  The following results are also proved by working fiberwise.
Proposition A.30. Suppose that (C, ⊗, 1C ) and (D, ∧, 1D ) are symmetric monoidal
categories, and that
                                          F :C→D
                             T : F X ∧ F Y → F (X ⊗ Y )
                                     φ : 1D → F 1D
form a lax monoidal functor. If p : I → J is a finite covering category then T gives
a natural transformation
                             pT∗ : p∧    I      J
                                    ∗ ◦ F → F ◦ p∗
                                                     ⊗

between the two ways of going around
                                                  FI
                                      CI                / DI

                                    p⊗
                                     ∗                         p∧
                                                                ∗
                                                          
                                      CJ              J
                                                        / DJ .
                                                  F

If T is a natural isomorphism, then so is pT .                                         
   The association p 7→ pT∗ of Proposition A.30 is compatible with the composition
isomorphism of Proposition A.29 in the evident sense.
   Suppose that p : I → J is a covering category, and f : J˜ → J is a functor. Let
I be the “rigid pullback” category of pairs (j ′ , i) ∈ J˜ × I with f (i′ ) = p(j), and in
˜
which a morphism is a pair (g, g ′ ) with f (g) = p(g ′ ). Then the functor p̃ : I˜ → J˜
defined by (j ′ , i) 7→ j ′ is a covering category.
Proposition A.31. In the situation described above, if p : I → J is finite then the
following commutes up to a natural isomorphism given by the symmetric monoidal
structure
                                  CI      / C I˜

                                    p⊗
                                     ∗                         p̃⊗
                                                                 ∗
                                                          
                                      CJ                / C J˜ .
                                                  f∗

                                                                                       
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                131


  The categories I and J used in this paper arise from a left action of a group G
on a finite set A. Given such an A, let BA G be the category whose set of objects is
A and in which a map a → a′ is an element g ∈ G with the property that g a = a′ .
When A = pt we will abbreviate BA G to just BG. For any finite map A → B of
G-sets, the corresponding functor
                                    BA G → BB G
is a covering category.
   In the following series of examples we suppose H ⊂ G is a subgroup, take
A = G/H to be the set of right H-cosets, and write p : A → pt for the unique
equivariant map. In this case the inclusion of the identity coset gives an equivalence
                                    BH → BA G
and hence an equivalence of functor categories
                                   C BA G → C BH .
An inverse is provided by the left Kan extension.
Example A.32. Suppose C is the category of abelian groups, with ⊕ as the symmet-
ric monoidal structure. Then C BA G is equivalent to the category of left H-modules,
and the functor p⊕∗ is left additive induction. If the symmetric monoidal structure
is taken to be the tensor product, then p⊗ ∗ is “norm induction.”

Example A.33. Now take (C, ⊗, 1) to be the category (S, ∧, S 0 ) of orthogonal spec-
tra. From the above and Proposition A.19, the category SBA G is equivalent to the
category of orthogonal H-spectra, and SBG is equivalent to the category of orthog-
onal G-spectra. In this case p∧
                              ∗ defines a multiplicative transfer from orthogonal
H-spectra to orthogonal G-spectra. This is the norm. It is discussed more fully in
§A.4 and §B.5.
Remark A.34. When C has all colimits and the tensor unit 1 is the initial object
one may form infinite “weak” monoidal products, and the condition that p : I → J
be finite may be dropped. If I is an infinite set and {Xi} a collection of objects
indexed by i ∈ I set
                                                  ′
                            ⊗I Xi = lim ⊗I Xi
                                        −→
                                      ′I ⊂I finite
in which the transition maps associated to I ′ ⊂ I ′′ are given by tensoring with the
unit                         ′   ′′ ′ 
                       ′                                     ′′
                    ⊗I Xi ≈ ⊗I Xi ⊗ ⊗I −I 1 → ⊗I Xi.
The functor p⊗
             ∗ is constructed by working fiberwise.

Remark A.35. The results of this section apply, with the obvious modifications, in
the setting of enriched categories.
A.3.3. Distributive laws. Continuing with the same notation, we now assume that
the category C comes equipped with two symmetric monoidal structures, ⊗ and ⊕,
and that ⊗ distributes over ⊕ in the sense that there is a natural isomorphism
                        A ⊗ (B ⊕ C) ≈ (A ⊗ B) ⊕ (A ⊗ C)
compatible with all of the symmetries. For a precise definition see [45], or the
definition of bipermutative category in [58, Chapter VI]. In all of our examples, ⊕
132                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


will be the categorical coproduct, and A ⊗ ( − ) will commute with all colimits.
Given p : I → J and q : J → K we can form

                                              q∗⊗ ◦ p⊕
                                                     ∗.

Our goal is to express this in the form

                                    q∗⊗ ◦ p⊕    ⊕    ⊗
                                           ∗ = r∗ ◦ π∗ .

   We start with the case in which K is the trivial category, and p : I → J is a
map of finite sets. Let Γ = Γ(I/J) be the set of sections s : J → I of p. Write
ev : J × Γ → I for the evaluation map, π : J × Γ → Γ for the projection, and
with an eye toward generalization, r : Γ → {pt} for the unique map. The following
lemma expresses the usual distributivity expansion
                                                       
                      O M                 M O
                                 Xi ≈            Xs(j)
                          j∈J    p(i)=j                  s∈Γ       j∈J

in functorial terms.

Lemma A.36. The following diagram of functors commutes, up to a canonical
natural isomorphism given by the symmetries of the symmetric monoidal structures
                                                     ev∗
                                        CI                 / C J×Γ

                                    p⊕
                                     ∗                             π∗⊗
                                                              
                                        C J✹                   CΓ
                                            ✹✹               ✆✆
                                              ✹✹            ✆
                                         q∗⊗ ✹           ✆✆✆r⊕
                                                      ✆ ∗
                                                     C          .
                                                                                       

   Working fiberwise, it is now a simple matter to deal with the more general case
in which p : I → J and q : J → K are covering categories. Let Γ be the category
of pairs (k, s), with k ∈ K and s a section of (q ◦ p)−1 k → q −1 k. A morphism
(k, s) → (k, s′ ) in Γ is a map f : k → k ′ making the following diagram commute

                                              (q◦p)−1 (f )
                         (q ◦ p)−1 k                                / (q ◦ p)−1 k ′
                               O                                            O
                             s                                                  s′

                            p−1 k                                        / p−1 k ′ .
                                                p−1 (f )

Write Γ × J for the fiber product,
        K

                                          ev : Γ × J → I
                                                     K

for the “evaluation,” and π : Γ × J → J for the projection. By naturality in I and
                                    K
J in Lemma A.36 we have
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            133


Proposition A.37. The following diagram of functors commutes, up to a canonical
natural isomorphism given by the symmetries of the symmetric monoidal structures

                                  CI
                                               ev∗    / C J×
                                                           K
                                                             Γ


                                 p⊕
                                  ∗                            π∗⊗
                                                          
                                  C J✼                 CΓ
                                      ✼✼             ✂✂
                                        ✼✼          ✂
                                    q∗⊗ ✼
                                          ✼       ✂✂
                                               ✂✂ r∗⊕
                                            CK
                                                                                    
   This formula is used in showing that the norm of a wedge of regular slice cells
is a wedge of regular slice cells (Proposition 4.7), in the construction of monomial
ideals (§A.3.6), and in describing the structure of equivariant twisted monoid rings
and their monomial ideals (§2.4).
A.3.4. Indexed monoidal products and pushouts. The homotopy theoretic proper-
ties of the norm depend on a formula for the indexed monoidal product of a pushout.
We describe here the absolute case. The fiberwise analogue is spelled out in §B.8.2.
   Suppose that (C, ⊗) is a closed symmetric monoidal category with finite colimits,
and let I be a finite set. For X ∈ C I write X ⊗I for the iterated monoidal product.
Suppose we are given a pushout diagram
(A.38)                                A       /B

                                                      
                                          X          /Y
in C I . We wish to express Y ⊗I as an iterated pushout. Since the coequalizer
diagram
                            X ∐A∐B ⇒X ∐B →Y
can be completed to a reflexive coequalizer, the sequence
                          (X ∐ A ∐ B)⊗I ⇒ (X ∐ B)⊗I → Y ⊗I
is a coequalizer (Proposition A.26). Using the distributivity law of §A.3.3 this can
be re-written as
             a                                a
                    X ⊗I0 ⊗ A⊗I1 ⊗ B ⊗I2 ⇒          X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1 → Y ⊗I .
          I=I0 ∐I1 ∐I2                               I=I0 ∐I1

The horizontal arrows do not preserve the coproduct decompositions, but the se-
quence can be filtered by the cardinality of the exponent of B. Define filn Y by the
coequalizer diagram
            a                                  a
                    X ⊗I0 ⊗ A⊗I1 ⊗ B ⊗I2 ⇒           X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1 → filn Y.
          I=I0 ∐I1 ∐I2                               I=I0 ∐I1
          |I1 |+|I2 |≤n                               |I1 |≤n

Thus fil0 Y = X ⊗I and fil|I| Y = Y ⊗I . There is an evident coequalizer diagram
     a                                               a                  
             X ⊗I0 ⊗ A⊗I1 ⊗ B ⊗I2 ⇒ filn−1 Y ∐            X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1 → filn Y,
  I=I0 ∐I1 ∐I2                                                 I=I0 ∐I1
  |I1 |+|I2 |=n                                                 |I1 |=n
134                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


which can be re-written as a pushout square
              a                                               a
                      X ⊗I0 ⊗ A⊗I1 ⊗ B ⊗I2              /              X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1
           I=I2 ∐I1 ∐I0                                     I=I1 ∐I0
            |I0 |=|I|−n                                      |I1 |=n


                                                                        
                            filn−1 Y                               / filn Y .

The upper left term may be replaced by its effective quotient
                              a
                                  X ⊗I0 ⊗ ∂A B ⊗I1
                                   |I1 |=n
                ⊗S
in which ∂A B        is defined by the coequalizer diagram
                a                                     a
(A.39)                   A⊗S0 ⊗ A⊗S1 ⊗ B ⊗S2 ⇒             A⊗S0 ⊗ B ⊗S1 → ∂A B ⊗S ,
         S=S0 ∐S1 ∐S2                                S=S0 ∐S1
            S0 6=∅                                    S0 6=∅

leading to a pushout square
                 a                                     a
(A.40)                 X ⊗I0 ⊗ ∂A B ⊗I1          /              X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1
                 I=I0 ∐I1                            I=I0 ∐I1
                  |I1 |=n                             |I1 |=n

                                                                   
                          filn−1 Y ⊗I                        / filn Y ⊗I .

The object ∂A B ⊗S can also be computed as the coequalizer of
             a                                 a
(A.41)              A⊗S0 ⊗ A⊗S1 ⊗ B ⊗S2 ⇒           A⊗S0 ⊗ B ⊗S1 → ∂A B ⊗S ,
         S=S0 ∐S1 ∐S2                                S=S0 ∐S1
          |S0 |=|S1 |=1                               |S0 |=1

  We call the map
                                ∂A B ⊗S → B ⊗S
the indexed corner map, since in the absolute case with |I| = 2 it reduces to the
“corner map” in
                                `
                         A⊗B B⊗A               / B⊗A


                                                   
                              A⊗B               / B⊗B
from the pushout of the top and left arrows to the bottom right term.
Remark A.42. The category of arrows in C becomes a closed symmetric monoidal
category with
                            (A1 → B1 ) ⊗ (A2 → B2 )
taken to be the corner map in
                                  A1 ⊗ A2      / A1 ⊗ B2


                                                    
                                  B1 ⊗ A2      / B1 ⊗ B2 .

If A → B is a map in C S then (A → B)⊗S works out to be ∂A B ⊗S → B ⊗S .
                                       KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              135


   By working fiberwise, one obtains a similar iterated pushout describing p⊗∗Y,
involving the evident analogue ∂A p⊗
                                   ∗ B → p ⊗
                                           ∗ B of ∂A B ⊗S
                                                          → B ⊗S
                                                                 .
   Taking A = X and B = Y in (A.38) gives a filtration of the indexed monoidal
product of any map. In the case of a pushout square (A.38) the two filtrations in
fact coincide. We describe the absolute case. The relative case follows easily by
working fiberwise.
Proposition A.43. Let
(A.44)                                          A     /B

                                                       
                                                X     /Y
be a pushout square in C I .
  i) The square
                                          ∂A B ⊗I       / B ⊗I


                                                           
                                          ∂X Y ⊗I       / Y ⊗I
is a pushout square.
 ii) The filtrations of Y ⊗I arising from (A.44) and
(A.45)                                X      /X

                                                       
                                                Y     /Y
coincide.

   Proof: The proof is by induction on n = |I|, the case in which n = 1 being
trivial. Let film Y ⊗I be the filtration computed from the pushout square (A.44),
and fil′m Y ⊗I be the one computed from (A.45). The evident map of squares gives
a natural map film Y ⊗I → fil′m Y ⊗I . Consider the diagram
                   a                              a
                        X ⊗I0 ⊗ ∂A B ⊗I1       /       X ⊗I0 ⊗ B ⊗I1
                  I=I0 ∐I1                                  I=I0 ∐I1
                   |I1 |=m                                   |I1 |=m



                    a                                        a            
                                 ⊗I0            ⊗I1                        ⊗I0
                             X         ⊗ ∂X Y           /              X         ⊗ Y ⊗I1
                I=I0 ∐I1                                    I=I0 ∐I1
                 |I1 |=m                                     |I1 |=m

                                                                        
                         film−1 Y ⊗I                              / film Y ⊗I .

If m < n then the induction hypothesis and part i) imply that the upper square is
a pushout square. This shows that the map film Y ⊗I → fil′m Y ⊗I is an isomorphism
m < n. The case m = n − 1 then gives an identification
                                        filn−1 Y ⊗I = ∂X Y ⊗I ,
136                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


which, when combined with the pushout square
                                       ∂A B ⊗I                  / B ⊗I


                                                                   
                                    filn−1 Y ⊗I                 / Y ⊗I

gives part i) for I.                                                                        
   By working in the category of arrows (as in Remark A.42) one can see that the
formation of ∂A (p⊗∗ B) is compatible with the isomorphism coming from the dis-
                                      p  q
tributive law. More explicitly, let I −
                                      →J −
                                         → K be a sequence of covering categories,
and recall the basic diagram

                                       CI
                                                        ev∗   / C J×
                                                                   K
                                                                     Γ


                                      p⊕
                                       ∗                                  π∗⊗
                                                                 
                                       C J✼                  CΓ
                                           ✼✼              ✄✄
                                             ✼✼           ✄
                                         q∗⊗ ✼
                                               ✼       ✄✄✄ ⊕
                                                     ✄ r∗
                                                   K
                                                 C                                  .
                                               I
Suppose that A → B is a map in C . The distributivity isomorphism in the arrow
category is given by
                           ∂(p⊕
                              ∗ A)
                                   (p⊕
                                     ∗ B)
                                         ⊗J                               / (p⊕ B)⊗J
                                                                                ∗

                                  ≈                                                     ≈
                                                                          
                         r∗⊕ ∂(ev∗ A) π∗⊗ (ev ∗ B)               / r⊕ π ⊗ (ev ∗ B) .
                                                                    ∗ ∗

The fact that the left vertical arrow is an isomorphism is what expresses the com-
patibility of ∂A q∗⊗ B with the distributive law.
A.3.5. Commutative algebras and indexed monoidal products. By Proposition A.5,
if C is a co-complete closed symmetric monoidal category, then comm C is cocom-
plete. The restriction functor p∗ : comm C J → comm C I then has a left adjoint p!
given by left Kan extension.
Proposition A.46. If p : I → J is a covering category, the following diagram
commutes
                           comm C I       / CI
                                                   p!                     p⊗
                                                                           ∗
                                                                     
                                    comm C J                    / CJ .


   Proof: For a commutative algebra A ∈ comm C I , and j ∈ J the value of p! A
at j is calculated as the colimit over the category I/j of the restriction of p. Since
p : I → J is a covering category, the category I/j is equivalent to the discrete
category p−1 j, and so
                                               −1
                                  (p! A)j = ⊗p j A,
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              137


and the result follows.                                                             

A.3.6. Monomial ideals. Let I be a set and consider the polynomial algebra
                                     A = Z[xi ],      i ∈ I.
As an abelian group, it has a basis consisting of the monomials xf , with
                                    f : I → {0, 1, 2, . . . }
a function taking the value zero on all but finitely many elements, and
                                        Y f (j)
                                  xf =      xj .
                                              j∈J

The collection of such f is a monoid under addition, and we denote it NI0 . If D ⊂ NI0
is a monoid ideal then the subgroup MD ⊂ A with basis {xf | f ∈ D} is an ideal.
These are the monomial ideals and they can be formed in any monoidal product of
free associative algebras in any closed symmetric monoidal category.
   Let (C, ⊗, 1) be a closed symmetric monoidal category. Fix a set I which we
temporarily assume to be finite. Given X ∈ C I let
                                          a
                                   TX =      X ⊗n
                                               n≥0

be the free associative algebra generated by X. Write A = p⊗   ∗ T X ∈ C, where
p : I → pt is the unique map. Then A is an associative algebra in C. The
motivating example above occurs when C is the category of abelian groups and
X is the constant diagram Xi = Z.
  Using Proposition A.37, the object A can be expressed as an indexed coproduct
                                       a
                                 A=        X ⊗f
                                            f :I→N0

where N0 = {0, 1, 2, . . . } and
                                            O
                                   X ⊗f =          X(i)⊗f (i) .
                                             i∈I
The set
                               NI0 = {f : I → N0 }
is a commutative monoid under addition of functions. The multiplication map in
A is the sum of the isomorphisms
(A.47)                             X ⊗f ⊗ X ⊗g ≈ X ⊗(f +g)
given by the symmetry of the monoidal product ⊗, and the isomorphism
                           X ⊗f (i) ⊗ X ⊗g(i) ≈ X ⊗(f (i)+g(i)) .
For a monoid ideal D ⊂ NI0 , set
                                               a
                                      MD =           X ⊗f .
                                              f ∈D

The formula (A.47) for the multiplication in A gives MD the structure of an ideal
in A. If D ⊂ D′ then the evident inclusion MD ⊂ MD′ is an inclusion of ideals.
   When C is pointed (in the sense that the initial object is isomorphic to the
terminal object), the map
                                   A → A/MD
138                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is a map of associative algebras, where A/MD is defined by the pushout diagram

                                  MD                /A


                                                    
                                       ∗         / A/MD ,

with ∗ denoting the terminal (and initial) object.

Definition A.48. The ideal MD ⊂ A is the monomial ideal associated to the
monoid ideal D.

Example A.49. Suppose that dim : NI0 → N0 is any homomorphism. Given d ∈ N0
the set
                                       {f | dim f ≥ d}
is a monoid ideal. We denote the corresponding monomial ideal Md . The Md form
a decreasing filtration
                    · · · ⊂ Md+1 ⊂ Md ⊂ · · · ⊂ M1 ⊂ M0 = A.
When C is pointed, the quotient
                                            Md /Md+1
is isomorphic as an A bimodule to
                                                a
                               A/M1 ⊗                    X ⊗f ,
                                              dim f =d

in which A act through its action on the left factor.

Remark A.50. The quotient module is defined by the pushout square

                              Md+1                  / Md


                                                     
                                  ∗             / Md /Md+1 .

The pushout can be calculated in the category of left A-modules, A bimodules, or
just in C.

Remark A.51. All of this discussion can be made to be covariant with respect to
inclusion in I. Suppose that I0 ⊂ I1 is an inclusion of finite sets and X1 : I1 → C
is an I1 -diagram. Define X0 : I1 → C by
                                    (
                                      X1 (i) i ∈ I0
                           X0 (i) =
                                      ∗      otherwise.

There is a natural map X0 → X1 . Let A0 and A1 be the associative algebras
constructed from the Xi as described above. The algebra A0 coincides with the
one constructed directly from the restriction of X0 to I0 . A monoid ideal D1 ⊂ NI01
defines ideals MD0 ⊂ A0 and MD1 ⊂ A1 . The monoid ideal D0 is the same as the
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 139


one constructed from the intersection of D0 with NI00 , where NI00 is regarded as a
subset of NI01 by extension by 0. There is a commutative diagram
                                    MD0              / MD1


                                                       
                                     A0              / A1 .
Using this, the construction of monomial ideals can be extended to the case of
infinite sets I, by passing to the colimit over the finite subsets. As in the motivating
example, when the set I is infinite, the indexing monoid NI0 is the set of finitely
supported functions.
   By working fiberwise, this entire discussion applies to the situation of a (possibly
infinite) covering category p : I → J. Associated to X : I → C is
                          A = p⊗            J         J
                               ∗ T X ∈ ass C = (ass C) .

In case I/J is infinite, the algebra A is formed fiberwise by passing to the colimit
from the finite monoidal products using the unit map, as described in Remark A.34.
As an object of C J , the algebra A decomposes into
                                         a
                                    A=       X ⊗f
                                              f ∈Γ

where Γ is the set of sections of
                                           I/J
                                         N0      →J
      I/J
with N0 formed from the Grothendieck construction applied to
                                     I
                             j 7→ N0j          (Ij = p−1 (j)).
                I/J
The category N0 is a commutative monoid over J, and associated to any monoid
            I/J
ideal D ⊂ N0 over J, is a monomial ideal MD ⊂ A.
   The situation of interest in this paper (see §2.4) is when I → J is of the form
                                         BK G → BG
                                                                             I/J
associated to a G-set K, and the unique map K → pt. In this case N0 is the
G-set NK0 of finitely supported functions K → N0 . The relative monoid ideals are
just the G-stable monoid ideals. A simple algebraic example arises in the case of
a polynomial algebra Z[xi ] in which a group G is acting on the set indexing the
variables.
A.4. The norm. We now specialize the discussion of §A.3 to the case (C, ⊗, 1) =
(S, ∧, S 0 ) and define the norm functor.
   Because of Proposition A.19 we may identify the category of G-equivariant or-
thogonal spectra as the functor category SBG . If H ⊂ G, then the functor
                                    i : BH → BG/H G
sending the unique object to the coset H/H is an equivalence of categories. This
leads to an equivalence
                               i∗ : SBG/H G → SBH ,
with inverse
                                i! : SBH → SBG/H G
140                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


given by the left Kan extension. Write p : BG/H G → BG for the functor corre-
sponding to the G-map G/H → pt.
                                   G
Definition A.52. The norm functor NH : SH → SG is the composite
                                          i!
                                  SBH■       / SBG/H G
                                      ■■
                                        ■■           ∧
                                           ■■
                                       NHG   ■■  p∗
                                                $
                                                  SBG
  By Proposition A.27 we have
                               G
Proposition A.53. The functor NH is symmetric monoidal and commutes with
sifted colimits.                                                      
Remark A.54. By Remark A.28, the norm also commutes with the formation of
coequalizer diagrams in SH whose underlying non-equivariant diagram in S extends
to a reflexive coequalizer.
Remark A.55. We have defined the norm on the topological categories of equivariant
spectra. Since it is symmetric monoidal it naturally extends to a functor of enriched
categories
                                      G
                                    NH   : SH → SG
                                           ¯    ¯
compatible with the norm on spaces (and, in fact, spectra) in the sense that it gives
for every X, Y ∈ SH a G-equivariant map
                   ¯
                           G                      G     G
                         NH  (SH (X, Y )) → SG (NH  X, NH Y ).
                              ¯              ¯
   By Proposition A.46, on equivariant commutative algebras the norm is the left
adjoint of the restriction functor.
Corollary A.56. The following diagram commutes up to a natural isomorphism
given by the symmetry of the smash product:

                                CommH            / SH
                                                          G
                                                         NH
                                                    
                                CommG            / SG .
The left vertical arrow is the left adjoint to the restriction functor.
Remark A.57. Because of Corollary A.56 we will refer to the left adjoint to the
restriction functor
                          CommG → CommH
as the commutative algebra norm, and denote it
                             G
                            NH : CommH → CommG .
  The Yoneda embedding gives a functor
                                    J op → S
                                       V 7→ S −V .
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                          141


By definition of ∧ this is a symmetric monoidal functor, and we are in the situation
described in Proposition A.30. Thus if p : I → J is a covering category, there is a
natural isomorphism between the two ways of going around
                                       I
(A.58)                           J op         / SI

                                    p⊕
                                     ∗                             p∧
                                                                    ∗
                                                             
                                             J
                                    J op                   / SJ .
                                                                  I
Take I = BG/H G and J = BG. Then the functor category J op is equivalent
                     op
to the category J H      (Proposition A.12), and SI is equivalent to SH (Proposi-
tion A.19). By naturality, the functor
                                                 op
                                         JH           → SH
corresponding to
                                                  I
                                         J op          → SI
is just the Yoneda embedding, and so sends an orthogonal H-representation V to
                      J                       op
S −V . Similarly J op is equivalent to J G , SJ is equivalent to the category
of orthogonal G-spectra, and the functor between them sends an orthogonal G-
representation W to W −W . One easily checks (as in Example A.32) that the
functor p⊕∗ corresponds to additive induction. We therefore have a commutative
diagram
                                    op
                               JH            / SH

                                  indG
                                     H
                                                                    G
                                                                   NH
                                                             
                                             op
                                    JG                     / SG
This proves
Proposition A.59. Let V be a finite dimensional H-representation, and set W =
indG
   H V . There is a natural isomorphism
                                     G −V
                                    NH S  ≈ S −W .
                                                                                  
A.5. h-cofibrations. Suppose that C is a complete topological category (and in
particular tensored and cotensored over T ).
Definition A.60. A map i : A → X in C is an h-cofibration if it has the homotopy
extension property: given f : X → Y and a homotopy h : A ⊗ [0, 1] → Y with
h|A⊗{0} = f ◦ i there is an extension of h to H : X ⊗ [0, 1] → Y .
Example A.61. The mapping cylinder A → X ∪ A ⊗ [0, 1] of any map A → X is an
                                                           A
h-cofibration.
  As is well-known, a map i : A → X is an h-cofibration if and only if
                    cyl i = X ⊗ {0}          ∪        A ⊗ [0, 1] → X ⊗ [0, 1]
                                         A⊗{0}

is the inclusion of a retract.
142                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Proposition A.62. The class of h-cofibrations is stable under composition, and
the formation of coproducts and cobase change. Given a sequence
                                f1            fi
                            X1 −→ · · · → Xi −→ Xi+1 → · · ·
in which each fi is an h-cofibration, the map
                                       X1 → lim Xi
                                            −→
                                              i
is an h-cofibration.                                                             
Proposition A.63. Any topological functor L which is a continuous left adjoint
preserves the class of h-cofibrations.                                      
   Now suppose that C has a symmetric monoidal structure ⊗ which is compatible
with the cartesian product of spaces, in the sense that for spaces S and T , and
objects X, Y ∈ C there is a natural isomorphism
                        (X ⊗ S) ⊗ (Y ⊗ T ) ≈ (X ⊗ Y ) ⊗ (S × T )
compatible with the enrichment and the symmetric monoidal structures. Then
given i : A → X we may form
                                     i⊗n : A⊗n → X ⊗n
and regard it as a map in the category C BΣn of objects in C equipped with a Σn -
action.
Proposition A.64. If A → X is an h-cofibration in C, then for any Z, A ⊗ Z →
X ⊗ Z is an h-cofibration.                                                 
Proposition A.65. If i : A → X is an h-cofibration then i⊗n is an h-cofibration
in C BΣn .
Remark A.66. In the category of equivariant orthogonal spectra a version of this
result appears in [54, Lemma 15.8] (where the reader is referred to [22, Lemma
XII.2.3]).

  Proof: The main point is to show that the diagonal inclusion
(A.67)                     cyl(A⊗n → X ⊗n ) → cyl(A → X)⊗n
is the inclusion of a Σn -equivariant retract. Granting this for the moment, one
constructs a Σn -equivariant retraction of
                            cyl(A⊗n → X ⊗n ) → X ⊗n ⊗ [0, 1]
as the composition
                1⊗diag
  X ⊗n ⊗ [0, 1] −−−−→ X ⊗n ⊗ [0, 1]n ≈ (X ⊗ [0, 1])⊗n
                                            → cyl(A → X)⊗n → cyl(A⊗n → X ⊗n ).
  For the retraction of (A.67) start with the pushout square
                               A ⊗ {0}            / A ⊗ [0, 1]


                                                    
                                  X          / cyl(A → X)
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 143


and consider the last stage of the filtration of cyl(A → X)⊗n constructed in §A.3.4
(A.68)                 ∂A (A ⊗ [0, 1])⊗n          / (A ⊗ [0, 1])⊗n


                                                          
                    filn−1 (cyl(A → X)⊗n )        / cyl(A → X)⊗n .

Form the Σn -equivariant map
                filn−1 (cyl(A → X)⊗n ) → X ⊗n → cyl(A⊗n → X ⊗n )
using the map cyl(A → X) → X. To extend it to filn (cyl(A → X)⊗n ) = cyl(A →
X)⊗n note that the top row of (A.68) can be identified with the tensor product of
the identity map of A⊗n with
                                    ∂{0} I n → I n .
This identification is compatible with the action of the symmetric group. The
desired extension is then constructed using any Σn -equivariant retraction of I n to
the diagonal which takes ∂{0} I n to {0}                                          
  Working fiberwise one concludes
Proposition A.69. Suppose that C is as above, and p : I → J is a covering
category. The indexed monoidal product
                                    p⊗   I
                                     ∗ :C →C
                                             J

preserves the class of h-cofibrations.                                               
  We end with a technical result which is useful for establishing some of the basic
homotopy theoretic properties of equivariant orthogonal spectra, especially in con-
nection with the monoidal geometric fixed point functor (§B.10). Though it does
not appear explicitly in the literature in this form, it is a minor variation of [48,
Appendix, Proposition 3.9] and is proved in the same manner.
Lemma A.70. An h-cofibration in SG is an objectwise closed inclusion.

   Proof: The assertion reduces immediately to showing that that h-cofibrations in
the category of compactly generated weak Hausdorff spaces are closed inclusions.
For this latter fact suppose that A ⊂ X is an h-cofibration of compactly generated
weak Hausdorff spaces. Then the mapping cylinder cyl(A → X) is an equalizer of
two maps from X ×[0, 1] to itself. Since X ×[0, 1] is weak Hausdorff, it is closed. But
A ⊂ X is the inverse image of cyl(A → X) under the inclusion X ×{1} → X ×[0, 1].
See [48, Pages 488-9].                                                               

  Appendix B. Homotopy theory of equivariant orthogonal spectra
    We now turn to the stable homotopy theory of equivariant orthogonal spectra,
the basis of which is the notion of stable weak equivalence defined in §2.2.4. Our goal
is to set up the infrastructure needed for the proofs of properties SpG      G
                                                                       1 -Sp6 , and for
working with the formation of indexed wedges, smash products, symmetric powers
and their compositions. These latter are explicit constructions, and to work with
them in homotopy theory means determining, in each case, a full subcategory of SG
on which the construction preserves weak equivalences, and which is homotopically
wide in the sense that it contains at least one object of each weak equivalence class,
144                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


    The standard way of doing this is to complete the set of weak equivalences to a
Quillen model category structure, in such a way that each of the constructions takes
weak equivalences between cofibrant objects to weak equivalences. This can be done
in this case, but a problem arises when composing these operations. For example,
in all of the standard model structures on SG , the symmetric powers of a cofibrant
object are not cofibrant (or at least not known to be). The situation is reminiscent
of the theory of unbounded operators, in which a domain of definition needs to be
specified, and in which one can run into trouble trying to compose operators. It
might be possible to find a model structure whose collection of cofibrant objects is
preserved by all of these constructions. But this is more than is really required.
    This is a situation where the language of model categories tends to obscure the
basic task at hand. What is needed is to determine, for a given functor, a homo-
topically wide full subcategory on which the functor preserves weak equivalences.
This problem depends only on the weak equivalences, and is most naturally con-
sidered in the context of homotopical categories. With this in mind we begin our
work using homotopical categories, where the entire focus is on weak equivalences
and derived functors, and put off introducing a model category structure until it is
really needed.
    Here is a summary of the contents of this appendix. In §B.1 we review the the-
ory of homotopical categories. Section B.2 introduces various notions of “flatness,”
which depend only on the class of weak equivalences, and play an important role in
determining the homotopical properties of various functors. In §B.3 we develop a
considerable amount of the stable homotopy theory of SG using only the language
of homotopical categories. This includes most of the results used in §2.2.5 to verify
                                                                st G         G
SpG       G
    1 -Sp5 . Our analysis is facilitated by an approximation π S to ho S       which
we study as a homotopical category in its own right. To go further it is helpful to
have a model structure around and in §B.4 we define the positive complete model
structure on SG . This is a variation on the positive stable model structure of [53]
having the convenient property that indexed wedges and smash products of cofi-
brant objects are cofibrant. Sections B.5 and B.6 describe the homotopy properties
of indexed smash and symmetric powers. Section B.7 contains a proof that the
forgetful functor comm SG → SG creates a model structure. The proofs of this
that appear in the literature are incomplete, and it does not seem possible to give
a complete proof without first analyzing the homotopy properties of indexed smash
products. Section B.8 contains the important result that the formation of indexed
smash products is homotopical on a subcategory of SG containing both the cofi-
brant objects and the spectra underlying cofibrant commutative rings. This result
is crucial for making use of the norm functor and is part of the reason that we work
outside of the framework of model categories. Sections B.10 and B.11 contain re-
sults on the geometric fixed point functor and its interaction with the constructions
described above. Finally, Section B.12 contains a construction of the real bordism
spectrum M UR on which all of the results of this paper are based.

B.1. Homotopical categories and model categories. We begin by reviewing
some notions from [21].

Definition B.1. A homotopical category is a category C equipped with a class of
morphisms called weak equivalences which contains all identity maps, and satisfies
the two out of six property described below.
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               145


  The two out of six property asserts that in the situation
                                    u       v       w
                                 •−
                                  →•−
                                    →•−
                                      →•
if vu and wv are in W then so are u, v, w, and vwu. It implies the “two out of
three” property (that two of three maps in composition being weak equivalences
implies the third is), and that isomorphisms are weak equivalences.
Remark B.2. If the weak equivalences have the property that a map is a weak
equivalence if and only if some functor applied to the map becomes an isomorphism,
then identity maps are weak equivalences, the two out of six property automatically
holds, and retracts of weak equivalences are weak equivalences.
  Suppose that C is a homotopical category.
Definition B.3. A homotopy functor is a functor F : C → D with the property
that F (w) is an isomorphism whenever w ∈ W.
   There is a universal homotopy functor L : C → ho C called the the localization of
C with respect to W. It is characterized uniquely up to unique isomorphism by the
following universal property: for every category D, and every homotopy functor
F : C → D there is a unique functor ho C → D making the diagram
                                        L
                                   C❈      / ho C
                                     ❈❈
                                       ❈❈
                                         ❈
                                      F ❈❈ 
                                             !
                                               D
commute. While this characterization may seem stronger than is natural for char-
acterizing an arrow in a 2-category, it simplifies the presentation. The difference
between this and the 2-categorical formulation amounts to the convention that the
map C → ho C be the identity map on objects. The category ho C is the homotopy
category of C. Since the localization functor L is the identity map on objects, it
tends not to appear in notation.
   Two issues emerge when working with homotopical categories. One is to find
a description of ho C(X, Y ) and the other is to describe conditions under which a
functor F : C → D between homotopical categories induces a functor ho F : ho C →
ho D. For the first question the following can be helpful.
Proposition B.4. The transformation C(X, − ) → ho C(X, − ) is the universal
natural transformation from C(X, − ) to a homotopy functor.

  Proof: This is one situation where it is clearer to actually make use of the
notation L : C → ho C. Spelled out, the assertion is that if F : C → Sets is a
homotopy functor and C(X, − ) → F a natural transformation, then there is a
unique dotted arrow making the diagram
(B.5)                            C(X, − )                         /
                                                                q8 F
                                                            q
                                                        q
                                   L                q
                                                q
                                     q
                             ho C(LX, L( − ))
commute. Before describing the proof we make an observation about the property
characterizing the functor L : C → ho C. For homotopy functors F and G on C, this
146                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


property supplies unique factorizations F = F̃ ◦ L and G = G̃ ◦ L. It also implies
that composition with L gives a bijection between the set of natural transformations
G̃ → F̃ and G → F .
   With this in mind we now turn to the proof of the proposition. By the Yoneda
Lemma, the horizontal arrow in (B.5) is given by an element of F (X). By the
remark above, the set of natural transformations
                                ho C(LX, L( − )) → F
is in bijection with the set of natural transformations
                                  ho C(LX, − ) → F̃
which, again by Yoneda, is in one to one correspondence with the elements of
F̃ (LX) = F (X). The map between these sets corresponding to the two ways of
going around (B.5) is the identity.                                       

Corollary B.6. Suppose that C is a homotopical category, and that X ∈ C has
the property that C(X, − ) is a homotopy functor. Then the natural transformation
C(X, − ) → ho C(X, − ) is a bijection.

  Proof: Immediate from Proposition B.4.                                              
   For the second question, there is an apparatus of definitions to organize the
situation.
Definition B.7. A functor between homotopical categories is homotopical if it
sends weak equivalences to weak equivalences.
   By the universal property, a homotopical functor F : C → D induces a functor
ho F : ho C → ho D. Furthermore, adjoint homotopical functors induce adjoint
functors on the homotopy categories. But there are more general situations under
which such a functor is induced. Suppose that F : C → D is a functor between
homotopical categories and that one can find a subcategory C ′ ⊂ C on which F is
homotopical (where the weak equivalences in C ′ are taken to be those morphisms
which are weak equivalences in C). Then F induces a functor
                                    ho C ′ → ho D.
If, in addition, ho C ′ → ho C is an equivalence of categories, then one gets an induced
functor ho C → ho D by composing with an inverse to this equivalence.
    The situation becomes more manageable when there is a pair (r, s) consisting
of a functor r : C → C with the property that F ◦ r is homotopical, and a natural
weak equivalence s : r → Id. In that case C ′ can be taken to be the full subcategory
generated by the image of r, the induced functor LF : ho C → ho D can be computed
as
                                    LF X = F ◦ r(X),
and because of s, comes equipped with a natural transformation between the two
ways of going around the diagram
                                           F
                                     C                    /D
                                                          7?
                                                   ✇✇✇✇✇✇
                                               T
                                           ✇
                                      ✇✇✇✇✇            
                                   ho C             / ho D .
                                           LF
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               147


Together with this transformation, LF is characterized by a universal property. It
is most easily stated if we overload some of the notation by using the symbol F to
denote the composite functor
                                     F
                                  C−
                                   → D → ho D
and identify functors ho C → ho D with homotopy functors C → ho D. With these
conventions we may regard the transformation T as going from LF to F
                                   T : LF → F.
The universal property is that if G : C → ho D is a homotopy functor and S : G → F
is a natural transformation, then there is a unique natural transformation G → LF
making
                                     G❇       / LF
                                        ❇❇
                                          ❇❇
                                            ❇       T
                                         S ❇❇ 
                                                !
                                                  F
commute. Put differently, LF is the closest homotopy functor to the left of F .
   The functor characterized by the above properties is the left derived functor of
F . It is guaranteed to exist when F is left deformable in the sense that there is a
pair (r, s) as above, and F ◦ r is homotopical.
   A common situation arises when the weak equivalences on C refine to a model
category structure, and F takes weak equivalences between cofibrant objects to
weak equivalences. In that case F is left deformable, and one may take (r, s) to be
a functorial cofibrant replacement.
   There are evident dual notions of a right deformable functors F and a right
derived functor RF . For more on the definition of derived functors the reader is
referred to [68] for the case of model categories, and to [21, Chapter VII] for the
more general case of homotopical categories.
   When
                                    F :C⇆D:G
are adjoint functors between homotopical categories, and F is left deformable and
G is right deformable, then the derived functors
                              LF : ho C ⇆ ho D : RG
are adjoint. See [21, Chapter VII, §44].
   It is common, when there is no confusion likely, to drop the L from LF and
not distinguish in notation between a functor and its derived functors. We follow
this convention in the main body of the paper, where the emphasis is on homotopy
theory.

B.2. Flat maps. The notion of a flat map and a flat functor was introduced in the
unpublished manuscript [31] in order to isolate useful classes of maps and objects on
which left derived functors can be computed. Though the original context involved
model categories, the definitions involve only the weak equivalences and belong most
naturally to the theory of homotopical categories. The dual notion was coined a
“sharp map” by Charles Rezk, and used for a different purpose in [72].
Definition B.8. A functor F : C → D between categories with weak equivalences
is flat if it is homotopical and preserves colimits.
148                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Typically the functor F will be a left adjoint, and so will automatically preserve
colimits.
Definition B.9. Suppose that C is a homotopical category possessing small colim-
its. A map f : A → X in C is flat if for every A → B and every weak equivalence
B → B ′ , the map
                                   X ∪ B → X ∪ B′
                                       A              A

is a weak equivalence.
   In other words a morphism f is flat if and only if “cobase change along f ”
preserves weak equivalences. Since cobase change is a left adjoint this is equivalent
to the flatness of the cobase change functor.
Example B.10. A model category is left proper if and only if every cofibration is
flat.
Proposition B.11.        i) Finite coproducts of flat maps are flat.
 ii) Composites of flat maps are flat
iii) Any cobase change of a flat map is flat.
iv) If a retract of a weak equivalence is a weak equivalence then a retract of a flat
map is flat.
                                                                                   
Proposition B.12. Suppose that
                                        ♭             ♭
                                X1 o         A1                / Y1

                               ∼              ∼                   ∼
                                                    ♭
                                                                  
                                X2 o         A2                / Y2

is a diagram in which A2 → Y2 and both maps in the top row are flat. If the vertical
maps are weak equivalences, then so is the map
                                X1 ∪ Y1 → X2 ∪ Y2
                                       A1                 A2

of pushouts.


  Proof: First suppose that A1 = A2 = A. Then
                                   X1 ∪ Y1 → X1 ∪ Y2
                                       A                  A

is a weak equivalence since A → X1 is flat. The map X1 → X1 ∪ Y2 is flat, since it
                                                                          A
                          ♭
is a cobase change of A −
                        → Y2 along A → X1 . But this implies that
                                            
                      X1 ∪ Y2 → X2 ∪ X1 ∪ Y2 = X2 ∪ Y2 .
                          A             X1        A                   A

is a weak equivalence. Putting these together gives the result in this case.
                            KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               149


  For the general case, consider the following diagram
                           X1 o             A1                   / Y1


                                                             
                        X1 ∪ A2 o           A2            / A2 ∪ Y1
                            A1                                    A1


                                                                   
                           X2 o             A2                   / Y2 .

The flatness of the maps A1 → X1 and A1 → Y1 implies that the upper vertical
maps (hence all the vertical maps) are weak equivalences, and that the maps in the
middle row are flat. It also implies that
                                    A1 → X1 ∪ Y1
                                                 A1

is flat. Since A1 → A2 is a weak equivalence, this means that
                                                     
                           X1 ∪ Y1 → A2 ∪ X1 ∪ Y1
                              A1             A1           A1

is a weak equivalence. But this is the map from the pushout of the top row to
the pushout of the middle row. By the case in which A1 = A2 , the map from
the pushout of the middle row to the pushout of the bottom row is a also a weak
equivalence. This completes the proof.                                       

Remark B.13. If C has the property that every map can be factored into a flat map
followed by a weak equivalence, then the above result holds with the assumption
that only one of the maps in the top row is a weak equivalence. Suppose for instance
that it is the map A1 → X1 , and factor A1 → Y1 into a flat map A1 → Y1′ followed
by a weak equivalence Y1′ → Y1 Now consider the diagram
                                        ♭             ♭   / Y′
                                 X1 o       A1              1

                                                             ∼

                                        ♭
                                                             
                                 X1 o       A1            / Y1

                              ∼              ∼               ∼
                                                           
                                 X2 o       A2            / Y2 .
                                                      ♭

By Proposition B.12, the map from the pushout of the top row to the pushout of
the middle row is a weak equivalence, as is the map from the pushout of the top
row to the pushout of the bottom row. The map from the pushout of the middle
row to the pushout of the bottom row is then a weak equivalence by the two out
of three property of weak equivalences.
Remark B.14. In the category SG equipped with the stable weak equivalences
(B.3.1), the h-cofibrations will turn out to be flat. The mapping cylinder con-
struction then factors every map into a flat map followed by a weak equivalence,
so Remark B.13 applies.
150                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Now suppose that (C, ⊗, 1) is a closed symmetric monoidal category, equipped
with a class W of weak equivalences, making C into a homotopical category.
Definition B.15. An object X ∈ C is flat if the functor X ⊗ ( − ) is flat.
   Showing that a symmetric monoidal structure on C induces one on ho C essen-
tially comes down to exhibiting enough flat objects in C. In §B.3.7 we will show
that the cellular objects of SG are flat.
Remark B.16. Suppose that every object Z ∈ C admits a weak equivalence equiva-
lence Z̃ → Z from a flat object Z̃. If X → Y is a weak equivalence of flat objects,
so is X ⊗ Z → Y ⊗ Z for any Z. This follows from the diagram
                                          ∼
                                X ⊗ Z̃        / X ⊗Z

                                 ∼
                                                 
                                Y ⊗ Z̃    ∼
                                              / Y ⊗Z .

B.3. Equivariant stable homotopy theory. The weak equivalences were defined
in §2.2.4 as the maps inducing isomorphisms of stable homotopy groups. Equipped
with them SG becomes a homotopical category, and the functor SG → ho SG is de-
fined. In this section we establish many of the basic properties of ho SG , including
most of the results used in §2.2.5 to verify SpG    G
                                               1 -Sp5 of §2.2.1.

B.3.1. Stable weak equivalences and basic homotopical functors. We begin with
some basic homotopical functors.
Proposition B.17. The formation of filtered colimits along objectwise closed in-
clusions is homotopical.

  Proof: This is immediate from the fact that formation of homotopy groups
commutes with filtered colimits of closed inclusions.                   
   Since h-cofibrations are objectwise closed inclusions (Lemma A.70), Proposi-
tion B.17 applies to the formation of filtered colimits along h-cofibrations.
   The following three results, which are part of [53, Theorem III.3.5] (see also [54,
Theorem 7.4 iv)]), imply that many basic functors are homotopical.
Proposition B.18. Suppose f : X → Y is a map and let F → X be the homotopy
fiber, defined by the pullback square
                                     F / PY

                                               
                                     X        /Y
                                          f

in which P Y is the path spectrum of Y . There is a long exact sequence
                   · · · → πkH F → πkH X → πkH Y → πk−1
                                                    H
                                                        F → ···

   Sketch of proof: This sequence is gotten by passing to the colimit from the exact
sequence
                    H         H         H         H
           · · · → πk+V FV → πk+V XV → πk+V YV → πk−1+V FV → · · · .
                                                                                    
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                151


Proposition B.19. For any X, any H ⊂ G, and any k ∈ Z the suspension map
                                πkH X → πk+1
                                         H
                                             S1 ∧ X
is an isomorphism.

   Sketch of proof: Choose an exhausting sequence {Vn } with the property that
                                  H            H
Vn ⊕ R ⊂ Vn+1 . Then the map πk+V   n
                                      XVn → πk+V  n+1
                                                      XVn+1 factors through the
                  H      1                                            H
suspension map πk+1+Vn S ∧ XVn , and so the sequence for computing πk+1  S1 ∧ X
threads through the sequence for computing πkH X.                             

Proposition B.20. Let X → Y be an h-cofibration.
  i) The map Y ∪ CX → Y /X is a weak equivalence.
 ii) There is a natural long exact sequence of stable homotopy groups
                · · · → πkH X → πkH Y → πkH (Y /X) → πk−1
                                                      H
                                                          X → ...,
in which the map πk Y → πk Y /X is induced by the evident quotient map, and the
connecting homomorphism πkH Y /X → πk−1
                                      H
                                         X is induced by the maps
                              Y /X ← Y ∪ CX → ΣX.
and the suspension isomorphism of Proposition B.19.

   Sketch of proof: For the first part, since A → X is an h-cofibration, the map
X ∪ CA → X/A is a homotopy equivalence, hence induces an isomorphism of stable
homotopy groups. The result can then be deduced from Proposition B.19 as in [48,
III.2.1].                                                                      

Corollary B.21. The h-cofibrations in SG are flat.                                  
   Proposition B.20 implies that the formation of mapping cones is homotopical
as is the formation of quotients of h-cofibrations. It also gives parts i) and iii) of
the Proposition below. Part ii) follows from the fact that the formation of unsta-
ble homotopy groups commutes with products and the fact that filtered colimits
commute with finite products.
Proposition B.22.        i) For any any set of spectra {Xα } the map
                               M                _
                                   π∗G Xα → π∗G Xα
is an isomorphism, hence the formation of wedges is homotopical.
 ii) For any any finite set of spectra {Xα } the map
                                   Y        Y
                               π∗G    Xα →      π∗G Xα
is an isomorphism, hence the formation of finite products is homotopical.
iii) For any finite set of spectra {Xα } the map
                                   _         Y
                                     Xα →      Xα
is a weak equivalence.
                                                                                    
152                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Corollary B.23. The category ho SG is additive, and admits finite products and
arbitrary coproducts. The coproducts are given by wedges and the finite products by
finite products.

   Proof: Let’s begin with the case of coproducts. Let J be a set. The adjoint
functors                     _       J
                                : SG ⇆ SG : diag
are homotopical by Proposition B.22. They therefore induce adjoint functors
                         _           J
                             : ho SG ⇆ ho SG : diag
on the homotopy categories. This shows that arbitrary coproducts exist in ho SG
and that they may be computed as wedges. A similar argument shows that finite
products exist, are computed as products in SG , and that the map from a finite
coproduct to a finite product is an isomorphism. This endows the morphism sets
in ho SG with the structure of commutative monoids. That they are in fact abelian
groups can be seen by checking that for all X, the “shearing map” X ∨X → X × X,
with first component the projection to the first summand and second component
the coproduct of the identity map with itself, is a weak equivalence.           
   The “indexed” analogue of Proposition B.22 is also true, and appears as Propo-
sition B.56. It expresses a kind of “equivariant additivity” on ho SG .
B.3.2. Suspension and zero space. The suspension and zero space functors were
defined in Definition 2.7. Formation of the suspension spectrum is nearly homo-
topical.
Proposition B.24. The suspension spectrum functor is homotopical on the subcat-
egory of non-degenerately based G-spaces. The right derived functor RΩ∞ X may
be computed as
                            RΩ∞ X = ho lim ΩVn XVn
                                         −→
where {Vn } is any choice of exhausting sequence, and ΩVn ( − ) is the G-space of
non-equivariant maps.

   Proof: The assertion about suspension spectra follows from the fact that if
K → L is an equivariant weak equivalence of non-degenerately based G-spaces,
then so is
                                 SV ∧ K → SV ∧ L
for any representation V . This reduces to the statement that for every H ⊂ G, the
map
                                H              H
                             S V ∧ K H → S V ∧ LH
is a weak equivalence, assuming K H → LH is. But this is a standard fact. The
functor RΩ∞ X = holim ΩVn XVn is clearly homotopical, so what is needed for the
                      −→
second assertion is to construct a functorial weak equivalence X → X ′ , in which
X ′ has the property that the map
                                RΩ∞ X ′ → Ω∞ X ′
is a weak equivalence. One way to do this is to define X → X ′ by XV →
holimn ΩVn XV ⊕Vn = XV′ . (One can also take X ′ to be the functorial fibrant
   −→
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             153


replacement coming from the small object construction in the positive complete
model structure of §B.4.1.)                                                 
   Adding a “whisker” provides a left deformation to Σ∞ , and the natural trans-
formation X → X ′ appearing in the proof above gives a right deformation of Ω∞ .
The derived suspension spectrum and zero space functors therefore induce adjoint
functors on the homotopy categories
                           LΣ∞ : ho T G ⇆ ho SG : RΩ∞ .
B.3.3. An approximation to the homotopy category. Our further analysis of ho SG
is facilitated by an approximation, π st SG .
    Let
(B.25)                          εV : S −V ∧ S V → S 0
be the map adjoint to the identity map of S V . Associated to a linear isometric
embedding t : V → W is a map
(B.26)                        S −W ∧ S W → S −V ∧ S V
One way to describe it is to note that the space of such maps is the space of
equivariant maps
                            S W → S −V ∧ S V )W ,
and that
         S −V ∧ S V )W ≈ Thom(O(V, W ); (W − V ) ⊕ V ) ≈ O(V, W )+ ∧ S W .
The map (B.26) corresponds to smashing the identity map of S W with the map
S 0 → O(V, W )G + sending the non-base point to t. The map (B.26) can also be
expressed as Id ∧ǫU after rewriting the domain as
                               S −V ∧ S V ∧ S −U ∧ S U ,
with U = W − t(V ). When V < W the fixed point space O(V, W )G is connected,
and so the homotopy class (B.26) is independent of the choice of t.
   For X, Y ∈ SG let
                    π st SG (X, Y ) = lim π0 SG (S −V ∧ S V ∧ X, Y ),
                                      −→
                                      V
in which the limit is taken over the partially ordered set of representations of G
(§2.2.4). We wish to make π st SG (X, Y ) into the morphisms in a category. For this
we need to define the composition law. An element f ∈ π st SG is represented by
a map fV : S −V ∧ S V ∧ X → Y . Given f ∈ π st SG (X, Y ) and g ∈ π st SG (Y, Z)
represented by
                               fV : S −V ∧ S V ∧ X → Y
                             gW : S −W ∧ S W ∧ Y → Z
the composition g ◦ f is defined to be the equivalence class of the map
                      (g ◦ f )W ⊕V : S −W ⊕V ∧ S W ⊕V ∧ X → Z
constructed from the isomorphism
                    S −W ⊕V ∧ S W ⊕V ≈ S −W ∧ S W ∧ S −V ∧ S V
and the composite
                                            Id ∧fV                      gW
           S −W ∧ S W ∧ S −V ∧ S V ∧ X −−−−→ S −W ∧ S W ∧ Y −−→ Z.
154                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Associativity of the composition follows from the associativity of the smash product.
Definition B.27. The category π st SG is the category whose objects are those of
SG , with morphisms π st SG (X, Y ), and the composition law described above.
  One thing that makes π st SG so useful is that the hom sets are easy to describe,
and yet the functors πkH factor through it and are corepresentable.
Proposition B.28. For all k ∈ Z, there is a natural isomorphism
(B.29)                       π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , Y ) ≈ πkH (Y ).

  Proof: Suppose k ≥ 0. Then
             π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , Y ) = lim π0 SG (S −V ∧ S V ∧ G/H+ ∧ S k , Y )
                                         −→
                                       = lim π0 SH (S −V ∧ S V ∧ S k , Y )
                                         −→
                                       = lim π0 T H (S V ∧ S k , YV )
                                         −→
                                              H
                                       = lim πk+V  YV = πkH Y.
                                         −→
Similarly,
          π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S −k , Y ) = lim π0 SG (S −V ∧ S V ∧ G/H+ ∧ S −k , Y )
                                       −→
                                     = lim π0 SH (S −V ∧ S V ∧ S −k , Y )
                                       −→
                                     = lim π0 T H (S V , YV +k )
                                       −→
                                     = lim πVH YV +k = lim πW    H          H
                                                                   −k YW = π−k Y.
                                       −→                 −→
                                         V               W >k
                                                                                      
                                                             G
  Proposition B.28 implies that a map X → Y ∈ S which becomes an isomor-
phism in π st SG is a weak equivalence. An important example is
Proposition B.30. Suppose that V is a representation of G. For every X, the
map
(B.31)                               S −V ∧ S V ∧ X → X
is an isomorphism in π st SG , hence a weak equivalence.

  Proof: We will show that for all Y , the map
                        π st SG (X, Y ) → π st SG (S −V ∧ S V ∧ X, Y )
is an isomorphism. By definition,
(B.32)                   π st SG (X, Y ) = lim(S −W ∧ S W ∧ X, Y ),
                                           −→
                                             W
while
        π st SG (S −V ∧ S V ∧ X, Y ) = lim π0 SG (S −U ∧ S U ∧ S −V ∧ S V ∧ X, Y ).
                                       −→
                                        U

Writing W = U ⊕V and using the identification S −W ∧S W ≈ S −U ∧S U ∧S −V ∧S V ,
this last colimit may be replaced by
                              lim π0 SG (S −W ∧ S W ∧ X, Y ),
                              −→
                              W >V
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                    155


since the set {U | U ⊕ V > V } is cofinal in the poset of all representations. But
this clearly coincides with (B.32), since {W | W > V } is also cofinal in the poset
of representations.                                                              

Remark B.33. The weak equivalence (B.31) is often written in the form
                           S −V ⊕W ∧ S W ∧ X → S −V ∧ X.
This is gotten from (B.31) by writing S −V ⊕W as S −V ∧ S −W and writing the map
as                                                        
                     S −W ∧ S W ∧ S −V ∧ X → S −V ∧ X .
Corollary B.34. Suppose that V is a representation of G. Smashing with S V and
S −V are inverse equivalences of π st SG .                                   
Remark B.35. Corollary B.34 does not directly imply the analogous statement for
ho SG . For that one needs to know that smashing with S V and S −V are homotopi-
cal. This will be proved in §B.3.5.
  One consequence of Corollary B.34 is that π st SG is tensored over the equivariant
Spanier-Whitehead category SWG defined in §2.2.1. The main point is to show that
a map K → L in SWG gives a natural map X ∧ K → X ∧ L in π st SG . For this,
suppose that the map K → L is represented by a map of spaces S V ∧ K → S V ∧ L.
This latter map gives us an element of
                          π st SG (X ∧ S V ∧ K, X ∧ S V ∧ L)
and hence an element of π st SG (X ∧ K, Y ∧ L) under the isomorphism of Corol-
lary B.34.
   This fact leads to a form of Spanier-Whitehead duality in π st SG . Suppose that
K is a finite G-CW complex, and that L is a “V -dual” in the sense that there is a
representation V of G and maps in SWG
                                    K ∧ L → SV
                                       SV → L ∧ K
with the property that the composites
                           SV ∧ L → L ∧ K ∧ L → L ∧ SV
                         K ∧ SV → K ∧ L ∧ SV → SV ∧ K
are the symmetry isomorphism. Then for X, Y ∈ π st SG the composite
(B.36) π st SG (X, Y ∧ K) → π st SG (X ∧ L, Y ∧ K ∧ L)
                              → π st SG (X ∧ L, Y ∧ S V ) ≈ π st SG (S −V ∧ X ∧ L, Y )
is an isomorphism, by the standard duality manipulation.
   Given X → Y ∈ SG , and any Z there is a long exact sequence
(B.37)   · · · → π st SG (Z, S k ∧ X) → π st SG (Z, S k ∧ Y ) → π st SG (Z, S k ∧ (Y ∪ CX))
                                                      → π st SG (Z, S k+1 ∧ X) → · · · .
As in the proof of B.20, this is proved with the argument of [48, III.2.1], using the
analogue of Proposition B.19 given as the special case of Corollary B.34 in which
V is trivial.
156                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


     There is also an easier long exact sequence in the other variable. Let A → X be
a map in SG and Y any spectrum. Then there is a long exact sequence
(B.38)
 · · · → π st SG (S k ∧ (X ∪ CA), Y ) → π st SG (S k ∧ X, Y ) → π st SG (S k ∧ A, Y ) → · · · .
Under the isomorphism given by Proposition B.28, this is the long exact sequence
of Proposition B.18 associated to the fibration sequence of function spectra
                                  Y X∪CA → Y X → Y A .
B.3.4. π st SG as a homotopical category. We now study π st SG as a homotopical
category, and in doing so establish the fact that the functor SWG → ho SG is fully
faithful.
   By Proposition B.28 the functors πkH factor through π st SG . We make π st SG into
a homotopical category by defining a map to be a weak equivalence if it induces
an isomorphism in πkH for all H ⊂ G and all k ∈ Z. Since a map in SG is a weak
equivalence if and only if it is so in π st SG , the canonical functor
(B.39)                               ho SG → ho π st SG
is an isomorphism. Corollary B.6 asserts that if X ∈ SG happens to have the prop-
erty that π st SG (X, − ) is a homotopy functor, then π st SG (X, − ) → ho π st SG (X, − )
is an isomorphism. Combining this with the isomorphism (B.39) gives
Lemma B.40. If X ∈ SG has the property that π st SG (X, − ) is a homotopy func-
tor, then for all Y , the maps
                                                         ∼
(B.41)              π st SG (X, Y ) −
                                    → ho π st SG (X, Y ) ←
                                                         − ho SG (X, Y )
are isomorphisms, and so ho SG (X, Y ) may be computed as π st SG (X, Y ).
Proposition B.42. For k ∈ Z the maps (B.29) and (B.41) give isomorphisms
               πkH X ≈ π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , X) ≈ ho SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , X).

    Proof: The first isomorphism is given by Proposition B.28, and it implies that
π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , X) is a homotopy functor of X. Lemma B.40 then gives the
second isomorphism.                                                             

Corollary B.43. A map X → Y in SG is a weak equivalence if and only if it
becomes an isomorphism in ho SG .                                      
Proposition B.44. When X is of the form X = S ℓ ∧ K with K a finite G-CW
complex, and ℓ ∈ Z, the functor π st SG (X, − ) is a homotopy functor, and so for all
Y ho SG (X, Y ) may be computed as π st SG (X, Y ).

   Proof: Working through the skeletal filtration of K and using the exact se-
quence (B.38) reduces the claim to the case in which K = G/H+ ∧ S n . But that
case is Corollary B.28.                                                     
   Note that
              π st SG (S 0 ∧ K, S 0 ∧ L) = lim π0 T G (S V ∧ K, S V ∧ L).
                                           −→
When L is a finite G-CW complex, this is the definition of SWG (K, L). Thus
Proposition B.44 contains as a special case
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            157


Proposition B.45. The functor Σ∞ induces a fully faithful embedding SWG →
ho SG .                                                                 
B.3.5. Equivariant additivity. Our next goal is to show that the formation of in-
dexed wedges in SG is homotopical. We will do this, as in [5], via a Spanier-
Whitehead duality argument. To make this work we need to show that smashing
with S V and S −V are homotopical. As mentioned in Remark B.35, this implies
that they induce inverse functors on ho SG . It also lays the groundwork for our
investigation of the homotopical properties of the smash product in §B.3.7.
Lemma B.46. For a map X → Y in π st SG , the following are equivalent
 i) The map X → Y is a weak equivalence.
 ii) For all H ⊂ G and all k ∈ Z the map
                     π st (G/H+ ∧ S k , X) → π st (G/H+ ∧ S k , Y )
is an isomorphism.
iii) For some representation V of G, all H ⊂ G and all k ∈ Z the map
              π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V , X) → π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V , Y )
is an isomorphism.
iv) For all representations V of G, all H ⊂ G and all k ∈ Z the map
              π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V , X) → π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V , Y )
is an isomorphism.

   Proof: The equivalence of the first two statements in Proposition B.42, and they
imply the fourth by Proposition B.44. The fourth statement obviously implies the
third. That the third statement implies the first two is proved by induction on
|G|, the assertion being trivial when G is trivial. We may therefore assume that
part iii) holds, and that part ii) holds for all proper H ⊂ G. Let V0 ⊂ V be the
subspace of invariant vectors. Using the long exact sequence (B.38), and working
by downward induction through an equivariant cell decomposition of S V , one sees
that for all k ∈ Z and all H ⊂ G, our assumptions imply that the map
              π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V0 , X) → π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V0 , Y )
is an isomorphism. But in π st SG there is an isomorphism S k ∧ S V0 ≈ S k+ℓ with
ℓ = dim V0 , so this implies part ii).                                         
   We next show that both smashing with S V and smashing with S −V are ho-
motopical functors. Combined with Corollary B.34 this implies that they induce
inverse equivalences of ho SG .
Proposition B.47. Let V be a representation of G. The following conditions on
a map X → Y ∈ π st SG are equivalent
 i) The map X → Y is a weak equivalence
 ii) The map S V ∧ X → S V ∧ Y is a weak equivalence
iii) The map S −V ∧ X → S −V ∧ Y is a weak equivalence.
158                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Proof: Since smashing with S V is the inverse equivalence of smashing with S −V
it suffices to establish the equivalence of the first two assertions. Now for any X,
smashing with S V gives an isomorphism
              π st (G/H+ ∧ S k , S −V ∧ X) ≈ π st (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S V , X),
so the equivalence of the first two assertions is a consequence of Lemma B.46.      

Corollary B.48. Suppose that V is a representation of G. Smashing with S V and
S −V are inverse equivalences of ho SG .                                     
   With Proposition B.47 in place, we have the following generalization of Propo-
sition B.44.
Proposition B.49. When X is of the form X = S −V ∧ K, with K a finite G-CW
complex, the functor π st SG (X, − ) is a homotopy functor, hence
                             π st SG (X, − ) → ho SG (X, − )
is an isomorphism.

  Proof: By Corollary B.34 there is an isomorphism.
                    π st SG (S −V ∧ K, ( − )) ≈ π st SG (K, S V ∧ ( − )).
But S V ∧ ( − ) is a homotopy functor by Proposition B.47, and π st SG (K, ( − )) is a
homotopy functor by Proposition B.44.                                               
  Expanded out, Proposition B.49 gives the formula
                     ho SG (S −V ∧ K, Y ) = lim[S W ∧ K, YV ⊕W ]G
                                            −→
                                               W

advertised in §2.2.4 as (2.19). Taking S −V ∧ K to be S −V ∧ S k ∧ G/H+ , k ∈ Z,
this specializes to the isomorphism
(B.50)            ho SG (S −V ∧ S k ∧ G/H+ , X) ≈ lim πW
                                                       H
                                                         +k XV ⊕W .
                                                  −→
                                                     W >−k
                                        H
In particular, the expression limW >−k πW +k XV ⊕W   is a homotopy functor of X.
                              −→
This fact is used in the proof of Proposition B.69, which plays a fundamental role
in establishing the positive complete stable model category structure on SG .
   The fact that π st SG is tensored over SWG also gives control over homotopical
properties of the smash product and of indexed wedges.
Corollary B.51. If X is of the form S −W ∧ K, with K a G-CW complex and W
a representation of G, then the functor
                                   ( − ) ∧ X : SG → SG
is homotopical.

   Proof: By Proposition B.17 we may assume K to be finite. In addition, it suffices
to show that smashing with S −W ∧ K is homotopical as a functor from π st SG to
itself. Suppose that Y → Y ′ is a weak equivalence. Let L ∈ SWG be a V -dual of
K. By the isomorphism of Proposition B.28 it suffices to show that for all H ⊂ G
and all k ∈ Z, the map
             π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , Y ∧ X) → π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k , Y ′ ∧ X)
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                159


is an isomorphism. Using the first part of the duality isomorphism (B.36), we can
identify this map with
π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S W ∧ L, S V ∧ Y ) → π st SG (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S W ∧ L, S V ∧ Y ′ ),
and finally by Proposition B.44, with
 ho SG (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S W ∧ L, S V ∧ Y ) → ho SG (G/H+ ∧ S k ∧ S W ∧ L, S V ∧ Y ′ ).
But this latter map is an isomorphism since S V ∧Y → S V ∧Y ′ is a weak equivalence
(Proposition B.47).                                                              


         Q B.52. Let J be a finite G-set.
Proposition
W                                           For any X ∈ SG , the canonical map
                                         st G
 j∈J X →    j∈J X is an isomorphism in π   S  , hence a weak equivalence.


  Proof: The finite G-sets are self-dual in SWG . Since
                                 _
                                     X ≈ J+ ∧ X,
                                  j∈J

the result follows from the duality isomorphism
                                                                      Y
            π st SG (Z, J+ ∧ X) ≈ π st SG (J+ ∧ Z, X) ≈ π st SG (Z,         X)
                                                                      j∈J

once one checks that the composite map is the same as the one coming from the
canonical map from the (constant) finite indexed wedge to the finite indexed prod-
uct. We leave this to the reader.                                               

Corollary B.53. Let J be a finite G-set and X an equivariant J-diagram. The
map
                              _         Y
                                  Xj →     Xj
                                  j∈J        j∈J
                       st G
is an isomorphism in π S , hence a weak equivalence.


   Proof: Let U : SG → SBJ G be the pullback map associated to the unique
equivariant map J → pt. The indexed wedge is the left adjoint to U and the indexed
product is the right adjoint. The natural transformation from the indexed wedge
to the indexed product is easily checked to satisfy the condition of Lemma B.54
below. This reduces us to checking the case in which the J-diagram is constant at
a G-spectrum X. But that case is covered by Proposition B.52.                    
  We have used
Lemma B.54. Suppose that U : D → C is a functor with a left adjoint L and right
adjoint R, and that L → R is a natural transformation. If the composition
(B.55)                             Id → U R → Id
of the adjoint to L → R with the counit of the adjunction is the identity, then
L → R is a retract of LU R → RU R.
160                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Proof: Just apply L → R on the left to the composition (B.55) to get
                              L          / LU R     /L

                                                   
                              R          / RU R     /R.
                                                                                 
   Corollary B.53 implies the only non-trivial part of the following “indexed” ana-
logue of Proposition B.22.
Proposition B.56.      i) The formation of finite indexed products is homotopical.
 ii) Suppose that J is a finite G-set, and X : BJ G → S is a functor. The map
                                  _         Y
                                      Xj →     Xj
                                   j∈J        j∈J
                                   G
is a stable weak equivalence in S . Hence the formation of finite indexed wedges is
homotopical.
iii) The formation of all indexed wedges is homotopical.
                                                                                 
B.3.6. Change of group. Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup. Specializing Proposition B.56
to the case J = G/H gives the homotopical properties of the “change of group”
functors. The functor i∗H : SG → SH is homotopical by definition, and so induces a
functor on the homotopy categories
                               i∗H : ho SG → ho SH .
Taking J = G/H in Proposition B.56 we see that the left and right adjoints to
i∗H are also homotopical, and that the canonical natural transformation between
them is a weak equivalence. They therefore induce left and right adjoints to the
restriction map on the homotopy categories, and the canonical map between them
is an isomorphism. This is the Wirthmüller isomorphism [84, 5].
B.3.7. Weak equivalences and the smash product. The smash product is not known
to preserve weak equivalences, but it does so in good cases.
Definition B.57. An equivariant orthogonal spectrum is cellular if it is in the
smallest subcategory of SG containing the spectra of the form G+ ∧ S −V ∧ S k with
                                                                  H
V a representation of H and k ≥ 0 and which is closed under the formation of
arbitrary coproducts, the formation of mapping cones, and the formation of filtered
colimits along h-cofibrations.
  The small object argument shows that every X receives, functorially, a weak
equivalence X̃ → X from a cellular X̃.
Proposition B.58. If K is cellular then K is flat: the functor X 7→ X ∧ K
preserves weak equivalences.

  Proof: By Corollary B.51 and the fact that the formation of indexed wedges is
homotopical (Proposition B.56) the result is true when K = G+ ∧ S −V ∧ S k . The
                                                                  H
functor X ∧ K is built from
                               X ∧ G+ ∧ S −V ∧ S k
                                          H
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                161


by forming wedges, mapping cones, and filtered colimits along h-cofibrations, all of
which are homotopical by Proposition B.56.                                        
   Since every object is weakly equivalent to a cellular object, and cellular objects
are flat, Remark B.16 implies
Proposition B.59. Suppose that X → Y is a weak equivalence of flat spectra.
Then for any Z, the map X ∧ Z → Y ∧ Z is a weak equivalence.             
   Let SG     G
        fl ⊂ S be the full subcategory of flat objects, considered as a homotopical
category using the stable weak equivalences. Since every object of SG is weakly
equivalent to an object of SG
                            fl , the functor

(B.60)                             ho SG
                                       fl → ho S
                                                 G


is an equivalence of categories. The above results show
Proposition B.61. The smash product functor
                                   SG     G
                                    fl × S → S
                                               G


is homotopical.                                                                     
  The equivalence (B.60) and Proposition B.58 are enough to show that the smash
product descends to give ho SG a symmetric monoidal structure, and that the map
SWG → ho SG is symmetric monoidal. For a more refined statement, see §B.4.2.

B.4. Spectra as a model category.

B.4.1. The positive complete model structure. Let Acof be the set of maps
(B.62)            Acof = {G+ ∧ S −V ∧ S+
                                       n−1
                                           → G+ ∧ S −V ∧ D+
                                                          n
                                                            }
                              H                      H

with n ≥ 0, H a subgroup of G and V a representation of H containing a non-zero
invariant vector. We define the class
                                     SG
                                      cof ⊂ S
                                              G


of positive complete cofibrations to be the smallest collection of maps in SG con-
taining the maps in (B.62) and which is closed under coproducts, cobase change
along arbitrary maps, and filtered colimits. A positive complete fibration (or just
fibration) is a map having the right lifting property with respect to the class of
maps in SG cof which are stable weak equivalences.

Proposition B.63. The category SG equipped with the stable weak equivalences,
the positive complete cofibrations and the positive complete fibrations forms a (cofi-
brantly generated) Quillen model category.
   We will call this model structure the positive complete model structure, and when
we need to recruit a model structure for some task, this will be the one we use.
Henceforth the terms “cofibration,” “fibration” and “weak equivalence” will refer
to “positive complete cofibration,” “positive complete fibration,” and “stable weak
equivalence.”
Remark B.64. Since the maps in Acof are mapping cylinders they are h-cofibrations.
This implies that the cofibrations in SG are h-cofibrations (cf. [53, Lemma III.2.5])
and hence flat. The cofibrant objects in SG are cellular hence flat.
162                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The “positive” condition is needed for the study of commutative algebras. On
the other hand, it creates some peculiarities in the model structure. For example,
the zero sphere S 0 is not cofibrant, nor is S 0 ∧ K when K is a G-CW complex. The
cofibrant replacements are given by
                                S −1 ∧ S 1 ∧ K → S 0 ∧ K.
This means that the adjunction
                                 Σ ∞ : T G ⇆ SG : Ω ∞ .
is not a Quillen adjunction, even though the left adjoint preserves all weak equiva-
lences between non-degenerately based G-spaces, and so barely needs to be derived.
   The positive complete model structure does not quite appear in the literature.
It is closely related to the positive stable model structure of [53].
   The positive complete model structure is cofibrantly generated. The set Acof is
the set of generating cofibrations. The set Bacyclic of generating acyclic cofibrations
consists of the analogous maps
(B.65)                  G+ ∧ S −V ∧ I+
                                     n−1
                                         → G+ ∧ S −V ∧ I n
                            H                      H

together with the corner maps formed by smashing
                                          
(B.66)                 G+ ∧ S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → G+ ∧ S̃ −V
                            H                             H
                 n−1       n
with the maps S+      → D+   . The H-representation V is assumed to have a non-
zero invariant vector, while W need not. The map (B.66) is extracted from the
factorization
(B.67)                     S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → S̃ −V → S −V
formed by applying the small object construction in SH , using the maps in Acof .
    A map X → Y has the right lifting property with respect to the class of maps
Acof if and only for each H ⊂ G and each representation V of H containing a
non-zero invariant vector, the map XV → YV is an acyclic fibration in T H . Among
other things this implies that X → Y is a weak equivalence and that the map
S̃ −V → S −V is a homotopy equivalence. From this one concludes that a map
X → Y has the right lifting property with respect to Bacyclic if and only if for each
subgroup H ⊂ G and each representation V of H containing a non-zero invariant
vector, the map XV → YV is a fibration in SH , and for each representation W of
H the square

(B.68)                            XV       / ΩW XV ⊕W


                                                
                                  YV       / ΩW YV ⊕W

is homotopy cartesian in T H .
Proposition B.69. If a map X → Y is a weak equivalence and has the right lifting
property with respect to Bacyclic then it has the right lifting property with respect to
Acof .
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 163


   Proof: We must show that the conditions imply that for each H ⊂ G and each
representation V of H containing a non-zero invariant vector, the map XV → YV
is an acyclic fibration in T H . Part of our assumption is that it is a fibration, so it
remains to show that it is a weak equivalence. Choose an exhausting sequence {Vn }.
Letting W range through this sequence in (B.68) leads to a homotopy cartesian
square
                             XV         / ho lim ΩVn XV ⊕Vn
                                             −→

                                             
                              YV    / ho lim ΩVn YV ⊕Vn .
                                         −→
Since X → Y is a weak equivalence, the rightmost vertical map is a weak equiva-
lence (by (B.50)), hence so is XV → YV .                                     

Proposition B.70. Any cobase change along a map in Bacyclic is a weak equiva-
lence.

   Proof: Since the maps in Bacyclic are flat, it suffices to check that the maps in
Bacyclic are weak equivalences. The only ones for which this is not obvious are the
corner maps. Since they are flat, it suffices to check that the quotients
                                                  
                     G+ ∧ S̃ −W / S −V ⊕W ∧ S V ∧ Dm /S m
                          H

are weakly contractible. Since Dm /S m is flat, and G+ ∧ ( − ) is homotopical, it
                                                               H
suffices to show that                                      
                                   S̃ −W / S −V ⊕W ∧ S V
is weakly contractible in SH , or, equivalently that the leftmost map in (B.67) is a
weak equivalence in SH . But that is a consequence of Proposition B.30 and the two
out of three property.                                                            

Proposition B.71. A map X → Y is a fibration if and only if it has the right
lifting property with respect to Bacyclic

    Proof: Suppose that A → B is an acyclic cofibration. Using the small object
construction with the maps in Bacyclic factor it as A → B̃ → B where A → B̃ is a
filtered colimit of maps constructed by iterated cobase change along maps in Bacyclic
and B̃ → B has the right lifting property with respect to Bacyclic . The map A → B̃
is a weak equivalence by Propositions B.70 and B.17. It follows that B̃ → B is a
weak equivalence, and so by Proposition B.69, has the right lifting property with
respect to Acof . This means that A → B is a retract of A → B̃. Since X → Y has
the right lifting property for A → B̃ it also has this property for A → B.        
   The verification of the model category axioms is now completely straightforward
and left to the reader.
   Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup. In the positive complete model category structures,
the restriction functor
                                   i∗H : SG → SH
preserves weak equivalences, fibrations and cofibrations. This implies
164                  M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Proposition B.72. Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup. The restriction functor and its left
adjoint form a Quillen pair
                              G+ ∧ ( − ) : SH ⇆ SG : i∗H ,
                                  H
as do the restriction functor and its right adjoint
                                              Y
                            i∗H : SG ⇆ SH :         ( − )j .
                                              j∈G/H

                                                                                    
Corollary B.73. An indexed wedge of cofibrations is a cofibration.                  
   Corollary B.73 is one of our reasons for introducing the positive complete model
structure. The positive stable model structure of [53] does not have this property.
                                                                                    ′
   Associated to any map i : G′ → G of finite groups is a functor i∗ : SG → SG .
This functor has both a left and right adjoint. The functor i∗ sends the generat-
ing cofibrations to indexed wedges of generating cofibrations, hence cofibrations by
Corollary B.73. Since it is a left adjoint it therefore sends cofibrations to cofibra-
tions. It also sends the generating acyclic cofibrations to weak equivalences. To see
                                                    n−1      n
this note that the generators of the form X ∧ (I+        → I+  ) are homotopy equiv-
alences hence go to homotopy equivalences. To check that the corner maps go to
weak equivalences, it suffices to show that the maps (B.66) go to weak equivalences.
Since S̃ −V → S −V is a homotopy equivalence, this is equivalent to showing that
maps of the form                               
                         G+ ∧ S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → G+ ∧ S −V
                             H                           H
go to weak equivalences. But these maps go to an indexed wedge of maps of the
form
                               ′   ′     ′        ′
(B.74)                     S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → S −V
which are weak equivalences. Thus i∗ also sends acyclic cofibrations to acyclic
cofibrations. This gives
Proposition B.75. If i : G′ → G is any homomorphism of finite groups, then the
pullback functor
                                             ′
                               i ∗ : SG → SG
is a left Quillen functor.
  For more along these lines see [53, Remark V.3.13]
B.4.2. Smash product. Equipped with the smash product and the positive complete
model category structure, SG is a symmetric monoidal model category in the sense
of Hovey [34, Definition 4.2.6] and Schwede-Shipley [75]. This means that the
analogue of Quillen’s axiom SM7 holds (the pushout product axiom), and for any
cofibrant X, the map
                                   S̃ 0 ∧ X → X
is a weak equivalence, where S̃ 0 → S 0 is a cofibrant approximation. As will be
apparent to the reader the proof applies equally well if “cofibration” is replaced by
“cellular.”
Proposition B.76. Equipped with the smash product, the positive complete model
structure is a symmetric monoidal model category.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                165


   The positive complete model structure also satisfies the monoid axiom [76, Def-
inition 3.3].
Proposition B.77. If X → Y is an acyclic cofibration in SG , and Z is arbitrary
then X ∧ Z → Y ∧ Z is a flat weak equivalence.
   We have stated these together to slightly streamline the proof. When cofibrations
are flat, the monoid axiom implies the “weak equivalence” part of the pushout
product axiom once one knows the “cofibration” part. Indeed suppose A1 → B1 is
an acyclic cofibration and A2 → B2 is a cofibration. Then the vertical arrows in
the diagram
                              A1 ∧ A2         / A1 ∧ B2

                                ∼                  ∼
                                                 
                              B1 ∧ A2       / B1 ∧ B2
are weak equivalences by the monoid axiom, and all of the arrows are cofibrations
by the “cofibration” part (Remark B.79). Since cofibrations are flat, the map from
A1 ∧ B2 to the pushout is a weak equivalence, and the desired weak equivalence
assertion then follows from two out of three.

   Proofs of Propositions B.76 and B.77: The unit axiom follows from Propo-
sition B.59 since cofibrant objects are cellular, hence flat (Remark B.64). The
pushout product axiom asserts that if f1 : A1 → B1 and f2 : A2 → B2 are cofibra-
tions, then the corner map from the pushout of the left and top arrows in
(B.78)                        A1 ∧ A2       / A1 ∧ B2


                                                  
                              B1 ∧ A2        / B1 ∧ B2
to the bottom right term is a cofibration, and is acyclic if one of f1 or f2 is. It
suffices to check the cofibration condition when f1 , and f2 are in Acof and so of the
form
                                                        
                              G ∧ S −V1 ∧ S k−1 → Dk
                                H1
                                                        
                              G ∧ S −V2 ∧ S ℓ−1 → Dℓ .
                               H2

But in that case the corner map is the smash product of G ∧ S −V1 with G ∧ S −V2
                                                             H1              H2
with the pushout product of S k−1 → Dk and S ℓ−1 → Dℓ . This is an indexed wedge
of cofibrations hence a cofibration. As remarked above, once Proposition B.77 is
proved, we are done. Since X → Y is a cofibration it is an h-cofibration, so it
suffices to show that (Y /X) ∧ Z is weakly contractible if Y /X is. But Y /X is
cofibrant, hence flat, so the claim follows from Proposition B.59.            

Remark B.79. The special case of the pushout product axiom for ∗ → A and ∗ → B
asserts that if A and B are cofibrant, then so is A ∧ B.
  Hovey [34, Theorem 4.3.2] now implies
Corollary B.80. The left derived smash product makes ho SG into a complete
symmetric monoidal category.
166                     M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


B.4.3. The canonical homotopy presentation. Let
                                      · · · ⊂ Vn ⊂ Vn+1 ⊂ . . .
be an exhausting sequence of orthogonal G-representations, and consider the tran-
sition diagram

(B.81)         S −Vn+1 ∧ JG (Vn , Vn+1 ) ∧ Xn                       / S −Vn+1 ∧ Xn+1


                                      
                                S −Vn ∧ Xn .
Write
                                           Wn = Vn+1 − Vn
for the orthogonal complement of Vn in Vn+1 . The inclusion Vn ⊂ Vn+1 gives an
embedding
                           S Wn → JG (Vn , Vn+1 ),
and so from (B.81) a diagram

                    S −(Vn ⊕Wn ) ∧ S Wn ∧ XVn                     / S −Vn+1 ∧ Xn+1


                                      
                                S −Vn ∧ Xn .
Putting these together as n varies results in a system
                    ∼            / A1 o ∼ B1        / A2 o ∼ B2     / A3 o ∼ B3
(B.82)       A0 o       B0                                                        / ....

The system (B.82) maps to X and a simple check of equivariant stable homotopy
groups shows that the map from its homotopy colimit to X is a weak equivalence.
Now for each n let Cn be the homotopy colimit of the portion
                                ∼                    / An−1 o ∼ Bn−1
(B.83)                   A0 o       B0     / ...                          / An

of (B.82). Then Cn is naturally weakly equivalent to An = S −Vn ∧ XVn , and the
Cn fit into a sequence
(B.84)                                   C0 → C1 → C2 → . . .
whose homotopy colimit coincides with that of (B.82). This gives the canonical
homotopy presentation of X. One can functorially replace the sequence (B.84) with
a weakly equivalent sequence of cofibrations between cofibrant-fibrant objects. The
colimit of this sequence is naturally weakly equivalent to X. It will be cofibrant
automatically, and fibrant since the model category SG is compactly generated.
   We write the canonical homotopy presentation of X as
                                    X ≈ holim (S −Vn ∧ XVn )cf ,
                                          −→
                                               Vn

or when more precision is needed, as a diagram
               X ← holim (S −Vn ∧ XVn )c → holim (S −Vn ∧ XVn )cf ,
                     −→                      −→
                             Vn                               Vn

with the subscript indicating cofibrant and cofibrant-fibrant replacement.
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              167


B.5. Homotopy properties of the norm. The purpose of this section is to
establish Proposition B.105 which asserts that indexed smash products have a left
derived functor which may be computed on cofibrant objects. As will be apparent
to the reader, they can also be computed on cellular objects. Many of the technical
results in this section are also required for our analysis of symmetric powers and of
commutative algebras.
   Before formulating our main results, we generalize the situation slightly.

B.5.1. Equivariant J-diagrams. Given a non-empty G-set J, consider the category
SBJ G of functors BJ G → S. A choice of point t in each G-orbit of J gives an
equivalence
                                         Y
                                SB J G ≈   SG t ,
                                             t

where Gt is the stabilizer of t. We give SBJ G the model structure corresponding
to the product of the positive complete model structures under this equivalence.
The model structure is independent of the chosen points in each orbit. We will
refer to the model category SBJ G as the model category of equivariant J-diagrams
of spectra.
   To be more explicit, a map of J-diagrams X → Y is a weak equivalence if and
only for each j ∈ J the map Xj → Y j is a weak equivalence in SGj . The generating
cofibrations are the maps whose j th component has the form
                                     m −1                      m
                   Gj + ∧ S −Vj ∧ S+ j      → Gj + ∧ S −Vj ∧ D+ j
                        Hj                          Hj

with Vj a representation of Hj having a non-zero invariant vector. They can be
expressed without reference to points and stabilizers as an indexed wedge
                                                     
(B.85)                      p∨
                             ∗ S
                                 −V
                                     ∧ S+n−1
                                             → D+  n


with p : J ′ → J a finite surjective map of G-sets, and V a G-equivariant orthogonal
vector bundle over J ′ having a nowhere-zero invariant section. The generating
acyclic cofibrations are the maps of the form
                                                       
                                 p∨
                                  ∗S
                                     −V
                                        ∧ I+n−1
                                                → I+ n


and those constructed as the corner map formed by smashing
                                                    
(B.86)                     p∨
                            ∗ S
                                −V ⊕W
                                      ∧ S W → S̃ −V
               n−1    n
with the maps S+   → D+ . As in (B.66), the map (B.86) is extracted from the
factorization
(B.87)                       S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → S̃ −V → S −V
by applying the small object construction in the category of equivariant J ′ -diagrams
using the generating cofibrations. The map S̃ −V → S V is a homotopy equivalence.
   If J → K is a map of finite G-sets, the restriction functor
                                    SBK G → SBJ G
has both a left and right adjoint, given by the two Kan extensions. All three
functors are homotopical, and the both the restriction functor and its left adjoint
send cofibrations to cofibrations. This means that the restriction functor is both a
left and right Quillen functor.
168                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Let p : J → K be an equivariant map of finite G-sets. The indexed smash
product gives a functor
                          p∧
                           ∗ = (−)
                                  ∧J/K
                                       : SB J G → SB K G .
When J → K is the map G/H → pt this is the norm. The various homotopical
properties of indexed and symmetric smash products we require are most naturally
expressed as properties of ( − )∧J/K . Working fiberwise, establishing these reduces
to the case K = pt. To keep the discussion uncluttered we focus on that case in
this section, leaving the extension to the case of more general K to the reader.
B.5.2. Indexed smash products and cofibrations. Let p : J → pt be the unique
equivariant map and write the indexed smash product as ( − )∧J . Note that if V is
an equivariant orthogonal vector bundle over J then
                                                  ′
                                 (S −V )∧J = S −V ,
where V ′ is the orthogonal G-space of global sections of V .
Lemma B.88. Suppose that A → B is a generating cofibration in SBJ G . The
indexed corner map ∂A B ∧J → B ∧J is an indexed wedge
                         _                           
                           S −V ∧ S(W )+ → D(W )+
                           Γ
in which Γ is a G-set, V and W are equivariant vector bundles over Γ and V has
a non-zero invariant section. In particular, ∂A B ∧J → B ∧J is a cofibration.

   Proof: This is a straightforward consequence of the distributive law (Theo-
rem A.37) applied to (B.85), and the compatibility of the formation of ∂A B ∧J
with indexed wedges, as described at the end of §A.3.4.                      

Proposition B.89. Suppose that J is a non-empty finite G-set. If X → Y is a
cofibration of equivariant J-diagrams, the indexed smash product
                                    X ∧J → Y ∧J
is an h-cofibration. It is a cofibration between cofibrant objects in SG if X is cofi-
brant.

   Proof: The assertion that X ∧J → Y ∧J is an h-cofibration is contained in Propo-
sition A.69. For the cofibration assertion we work by induction on |J|, and may
therefore assume the result to be known for any non-empty J0 ⊂ J and any H ⊂ G
stabilizing J0 as a subset. In particular, we may assume that if X is cofibrant, then
X ∧J0 is a cofibrant H-spectrum for any non-empty proper J0 ⊂ J and any H ⊂ G
stabilizing J0 as a subset.
   We will establish the theorem in the case in which X → Y arises from a pushout
square of J-diagrams
                                      A       /B

                                            
                                   X       /Y
in which A → B is a generating cofibration. We will show in this case that
X ∧J → Y ∧J is an h-cofibration, and is a cofibration if X is cofibrant. Since the
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 169


formation of indexed smash products commutes with directed colimits and retracts,
the proposition then follows from the small object argument.
   Give Y ∧J the filtration described in §A.3.4. The successive terms are related by
the pushout square
                  _                               _
(B.90)                   X ∧J0 ∧ ∂A B ∧J1      /       X ∧J0 ∧ B ∧J1
                J=J0 ∐J1                         J=J0 ∐J1
                 |J1 |=n                          |J1 |=n

                                                              
                       filn−1 Y ∧J                      / filn Y ∧J .

By Lemma B.88, each of the maps
                                     ∂A B ∧J1 → B ∧J1
is a cofibration. If X is cofibrant, then X ∧J0 is either S 0 or cofibrant by induction,
hence
                           X ∧J0 ∧ ∂A B ∧J1 → X ∧J0 ∧ B ∧J1
is a cofibration by the pushout product axiom. Since indexed wedges preserve
cofibrations, the top row of (B.90) is then a cofibration and hence so is the bottom
row.                                                                               
   To show that the indexed smash product has a left derived functor we need
to augment Proposition B.89 and show that what when X → Y is an acyclic
cofibration, then X ∧J → Y ∧J is a weak equivalence. This can be proved with
the above argument once we know that the indexed corner maps ∂A B ∧J → B ∧J
associated to the generating acyclic cofibrations are weak equivalences. But the
generating acyclic cofibrations contain the maps of the form (B.86) so dealing with
them requires understanding something about indexed corner maps of fairly general
cofibrations. These can be studied as the indexed smash products of maps in a
different symmetric monoidal category.

B.5.3. The category of arrows. Let SG
                                    1 denote the category of maps X = (X0 → X1 )
in SG , with morphisms the commutative diagrams. As mentioned in Remark A.42,
SG
 1 can be made into a closed symmetric monoidal category by defining

                               (X1 → X2 ) ∧ (Y1 → Y2 )
to be the corner map, from the pushout of the top and left arrows in
                               X1 ∧ Y1         / X2 ∧ Y1


                                                   
                               X1 ∧ Y2         / X2 ∧ Y2

to the bottom right corner. The tensor unit is ∗ → S 0 .
   We give SG
            1 the projective model structure in which a map

(B.91)                        (X1 → X2 ) → (Y1 → Y2 )
is a weak equivalence or fibration if each of Xi → Yi is, and is a cofibration if both
X1 → Y1 and the corner map
(B.92)                               X2 ∪ Y1 → Y2
                                         X1
170                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


are cofibrations. An object X1 → X2 is therefore cofibrant if X1 is cofibrant and
X1 → X2 is a cofibration.
   The model structure on SG  1 is compactly generated. The generating (acyclic)
cofibrations in SG
                 1 are of two types. Type I are the maps
                                (K → K) → (L → L)
and type II are the maps
                             (∗ → K) → (∗ → L)
were K → L is running through the set Acof defined in (B.62) (respectively Bacyclic ).
Proposition B.93. Equipped with the structure just described, SG
                                                               1 is a symmetric
monoidal model category satisfying the monoid axiom.

   Proof: The proof follows the proof of Propositions B.76 and B.77, and, because
of the special nature of the generators, essentially reduces to it. It suffices to check
the “cofibration” assertion on generators. In each of the three cases (type I and
type I, type II and type II, and mixed type) the result reduces to the case of SG .
Since the cofibrations are h-cofibration, the monoid axiom reduces showing that if
(∗ → ∗) → (X1 → X2 ) is an acyclic cofibration and (Z1 → Z2 ) is arbitrary, then
both the domain and range in the corner map of
                               X1 ∧ Z 1       / X1 ∧ Z 2


                                                  
                               X2 ∧ Z 1       / X2 ∧ Z 2

are weakly contractible. But by the monoid axiom for SG , every term in the diagram
is weakly contractible. The claim then follows since the left vertical arrow is an
h-cofibration, hence flat. As pointed out before the statement of Proposition B.76,
this implies the “weak equivalence” part of the pushout product axiom. The unit
axiom is also straightforward and left to the reader.                             
  The proof of Proposition B.93 is more or less completely formal, and can be
rewritten to apply to the arrow category of any symmetric monoidal model category.
This is done in the recent paper [33] of Hovey.
B.5.4. Indexed corner maps and cofibrations. Proposition B.93 addresses the homo-
topy properties of ordinary smash products in SG1 . For the indexed smash products
we work in the arrow category S1BJ G of maps of equivariant J-diagrams, in the
projective model structure. Our aim is to establish Proposition B.96 which gives
control over the indexed corner maps in SG (Proposition B.97). It is the analogue
in S1BJ G of Proposition B.89. In preparation, we need to identify the generating
(acyclic) cofibrations. As mentioned in the previous section, those in SG
                                                                        1 are of two
types. Type I are the maps
                                (K → K) → (L → L)
and type II are the maps
                               (∗ → K) → (∗ → L)
were K → L is running through the set Acof defined in (B.62) (respectively Bacyclic ).
The generating (acyclic) cofibrations in S1BJ G can be taken to be the equivariant
J-diagrams consisting entirely of type I or type II generators.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            171


Remark B.94. A map (B.91) is an h-cofibration if both X1 → Y1 and the corner
map (B.92) are. Since the cofibrations in SG are h-cofibrations the same is true of
the cofibrations in SG
                     1.

Lemma B.95. If X → Y is a generating cofibration in the category of equivariant
J-diagrams in SG
               1 , then the indexed corner map

                                    ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J
is a cofibration between cofibrant objects in SG
                                               1.


  Proof: First note that for generating cofibrations of type I, the corner map is
                        (∂K L∧J → ∂K L∧J ) → (L∧J → L∧J )
and in type II it is
                           (∗ → ∂K L∧J ) → (∗ → L∧J ).
The assertion therefore reduces to Lemma B.88.                                      

Proposition B.96. Suppose that J is a finite G-set. If
                                         X →Y
is a cofibration in SG
                     1 and X is cofibrant, then the indexed smash product
                                      ∧J      ∧J
                                     X    →Y
is a cofibration between cofibrant objects.

    Proof: The proof proceeds exactly as in the case of Proposition B.89. The
filtration of §A.3.4 and induction on |J| reduce the problem to showing that the
indexed corner map (in S1BJ G )
                                    ∂A Y ∧J → B ∧J
is a cofibration between cofibrant objects, when A → B is a cofibrant generator.
This is the content of Lemma B.95.                                            
  Specializing, we now have
Proposition B.97. If X → Y is a cofibration of equivariant J-diagrams and X
is cofibrant, then the indexed corner map ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J is a cofibration between
cofibrant objects.

   Proof: If X → Y is a cofibration of cofibrant J-diagrams, then (X → Y ) is
cofibrant J-diagram in SG
                        1 , and so

                          (X → Y )∧J = (∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J )
is cofibrant by Proposition B.96.                                                   
  The result below is not used elsewhere in this paper, but is useful in other
contexts. Having come this far, we record it here.
Proposition B.98. Suppose that X → Y → Z is a sequence of cofibrations of
equivariant J-diagrams in SG , and that X is cofibrant. Then the map
                                  ∂X Z ∧J → ∂Y Z ∧J
is a cofibration between cofibrant objects.
172                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Proof: Define Y → Z ′ by the pushout square
                                 X           /Y
                                            ⑥
                                          ⑥
                                        ⑥
                                    ~⑥        
                                  Z         / Z′ .
As the dashed arrow indicates, the map (X → Z) → (Y → Z) is a retract of
(X → Z) → (Y → Z ′ ). By Proposition B.96 the map
                       (∂X Z ∧J → Z ∧J ) → (∂Y Z ′∧J → Z ′∧J )
is a cofibration, hence so is the map
                                  ∂X Z ∧J → ∂Y Z ′∧J ,
and therefore so is its retract
                                  ∂X Z ∧J → ∂Y Z ∧J .
                                                                                   

B.5.5. Indexed smash products and acyclic cofibrations. With the indexed corner
maps of cofibrations under control we can now turn to the acyclic cofibrations.
Lemma B.99. If X → Y is a generating acyclic cofibration in SBJ G , then the
indexed corner map
                                    ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J
is an acyclic cofibration of cofibrant objects in SG .

   Proof: We know from Proposition B.97 that the indexed corner maps are cofibra-
tions between cofibrant objects, so what remains is the assertion that they are weak
equivalences. This can be reduced further. Suppose that X → Y is an acyclic cofi-
bration in SBJ G and we wish to show that the indexed corner map ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J
is a weak equivalence. Give Y ∧J the filtration described in §A.3.4, in which the
successive terms are related by the pushout square
                  _                              _
                        X ∧J0 ∧ ∂X Y ∧J1     /          X ∧J0 ∧ Y ∧J1
                J=J0 ∐J1                         J=J0 ∐J1
                 |J1 |=n                          |J1 |=n

                                                               
                       filn−1 Y ∧J                       / filn Y ∧J .
By Proposition B.97 and the pushout product axiom, the upper arrow is a cofibra-
tion, which, by induction on |J|, we may assume to be acyclic when n < |J|. Since
the cofibrations are flat, this means that the bottom arrow is an acyclic cofibra-
tion when n < |J|. It follows that in this case, the indexed corner map is a weak
equivalence if and only if the absolute map X ∧J → Y ∧J is.
   We now turn to the generating acyclic cofibrations. The generators of the form
       n−1      n
X ∧ I+     → I+   are homotopy equivalences, hence so are the absolute maps. The
other generators are of the form
                                                                 
(B.100)             n−1
                   S+    → Dn+ ∧ p∨    ∗S
                                          −V ⊕W
                                                ∧ S W → p∨∗ S̃
                                                               −V
                                                                   ,
where p : J ′ → J is a map of finite G-sets and V and W are equivariant vector
bundles over J ′ . The fact that the norm is multiplicative, together with the monoid
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              173


axiom for SG1 , reduces us to considering only the right hand factor in (B.100). The
distributive law further reduces us to the case J ′ = J. Finally, since the map
S̃ −V → S V is a homotopy equivalence, we may replace S̃ V with S V . Evaluating
both sides using Proposition A.59 we see that the assertion amounts to checking
that                               ′   ′      ′        ′
                               S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → S −V
is a weak equivalence, where V ′ and W ′ are the G-spaces of global sections. But
this is Proposition B.30 (see Remark B.33).                                       
   As with Lemma B.95, the separate cases of type I and type II generators reduce
the result below to Lemma B.99.
Lemma B.101. If X → Y is a generating acyclic cofibration in the category of
equivariant J-diagrams in SG
                           1 , then the indexed corner map

                                   ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J
is an acyclic cofibration of cofibrant objects in SG
                                                   1.                             
Proposition B.102. Suppose that J is a finite G-set. The functor
                                ( − )∧J : S1BJ G → SG
                                                    1
sends acyclic cofibrations between cofibrant objects to acyclic cofibration between
cofibrant objects, and hence weak equivalences between cofibrant objects to weak
equivalences between cofibrant objects.

   Proof: The proof proceeds exactly as in the case of Proposition B.89. That the
second assertion follows from the first is Ken Brown’s Lemma (see, for example [34,
Lemma 1.1.12]).                                                                  
  Specializing Proposition B.102, we have
Proposition B.103. If X → Y is an acyclic cofibration in SBJ G and X is cofi-
brant, then both the indexed corner map ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J and the absolute map
X ∧J → Y ∧J are acyclic cofibrations between cofibrant objects.            
B.5.6. Homotopy properties of the norm. With all this in hand we can now show
that indexed smash products have left derived functors. From Proposition B.89,
Proposition B.103, and Ken Brown’s Lemma we have
Proposition B.104. The indexed smash product
                                ( − )∧J : SBJ G → SG
takes weak equivalences between cofibrant objects to weak equivalences between cofi-
brant objects.                                                                    
  This gives
Proposition B.105. The indexed smash product has a left derived functor
                                    L
                               ( − )∧J : SBJ G → ho SG
which may be computed as
                                        L
                                X ∧J = (Xc )∧J
where Xc → X is a cofibrant approximation.
174                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


B.6. Symmetric powers. We now turn to the homotopical properties of symmet-
ric smash powers, or just “symmetric powers” for short.
B.6.1. Indexed symmetric powers. The nth symmetric (smash) power of a G-spectrum
is the orbit spectrum
                             Symn (X) = X ∧n /Σn .
The homotopy properties of this functor are fundamental to understanding the
homotopy theory of equivariant commutative algebras. For indexed smash products
of commutative algebras the distributive law leads one to consider indexed smash
products of symmetric powers
                                  (Symn X)∧J .
These can be written as
(B.106)            (Symn X)∧J = (X ∧n /Σn )∧J ≈ X ∧(n×J) /ΣJn
with n = {1, . . . , n}. This last expression is an indexed symmetric power. The
definition and homotopy properties of indexed symmetric powers are the subject of
this section.
    Before turning to the definition, we consider a more basic situation. Suppose
that i : G̃ → G is a surjective map of groups with kernel N . Then the functor
i∗ : SG → SG̃ has both a left and a right adjoint. This is most readily understood
by thinking of G-spectra as objects of S equipped with a G-action. The left adjoint
i! : SG̃ → SG sends a spectrum Y to the orbit spectrum Y /N equipped with its
residual G-action. The expression on the right of (B.106) is a special case of this.
As in any diagram category, the orbit spectrum Y /N is computed objectwise: if U is
an orthogonal vector space then (Y /N )U is the G-space YU /N . For the homotopical
properties we need information about the W -space, for a representation W of G.
It is given by the formula
                       (Y /N )W = O(U, W )+ ∧ (Y /N )U ,
                                                 O(U)

where U is any vector space of the same dimension as W but with trivial G-action.
Interchanging the colimits, this space can be written as
                             (O(U, W )+ ∧ YU )/N,
                                          O(U)

which, in turn is isomorphic to
                                       YW /N,
where now W is regarded as a G̃ representation through the map G̃ → G.
   We can now define indexed symmetric powers. Let I be a finite G-set, and
ΣI the group of (not necessarily equivariant) automorphisms of I, with G acting
by conjugation. Fix a G-stable subgroup Σ ⊂ ΣI and regard I as a Σ ⋊ G-set
through the projection map to G. For a Σ⋊G-equivariant I-diagram X the indexed
symmetric power is the orbit G-spectrum
                                  SymIΣ X = X ∧I /Σ.
When the indexing set I has a trivial G-action, Σ is the full symmetry group of I,
and the equivariant I-diagram is the constant diagram with value X ∈ SG , then
this construction is the usual symmetric power Sym|I| X discussed above. We will
usually not distinguish in notation between a Σ ⋊ G-spectrum X and the constant
equivariant I-diagram with value X.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            175


   If X → Y is a map of Σ ⋊ G-equivariant I-diagrams, the indexed symmetric
corner map is the map of orbit G-spectra
                              ∂X SymIΣ Y → SymIΣ Y
obtained by passing to Σ orbits from
                                       ∂X Y ∧I → Y ∧I .
It can also be regarded as the symmetric power SymIΣ (X → Y ) of (X → Y )
                                             B    I
regarded as an object of the arrow category S1 Σ⋊G .
Remark B.107. Since the orbit spectrum functor is a continuous left adjoint, it
sends h-cofibrations to h-cofibrations. For example, suppose that X → Y is a
cofibration of cofibrant Σ ⋊ G-equivariant I-diagrams. By Proposition B.89 and
Proposition B.97 both the indexed smash product
                                        X ∧I → Y ∧I
and the corner map
                                       ∂X Y ∧I → Y ∧I
are cofibrations, and hence h-cofibrations, of Σ ⋊ G-spectra. This means that all
four of the maps
                                   SymIΣ X → SymIΣ Y
                              ∂X SymIΣ Y → SymIΣ Y
                          (EG Σ)+ ∧ X ∧I → (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I
                                        Σ                 Σ
                       (EG Σ)+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I → (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I
                                   Σ                      Σ



are h-cofibrations of G-spectra.
   Note that X ∧I with its Σ ⋊ G-action is a special case of an indexed monoidal
product. This means that the distributive law applies to symmetric powers, and,
given a pushout square
                                  A        /B


                                                   
                                         X        /Y ,

there is a filtration of SymIΣ Y whose successive terms are related by passing to
Σ-orbits from the filtration described in §A.3.4.
   As described in [53], the homotopy theoretic analysis of indexed symmetric pow-
ers requires certain equivariant principal bundles. For the moment, let Σ be any
finite group with a G-action.
Definition B.108. An equivariant universal Σ-space is a Σ ⋊ G-space EG Σ with
the property that for each finite Σ ⋊ G-set S, the space of Σ ⋊ G-equivariant maps
                                            S → EG Σ
is empty if some element of S is fixed by a non-identity element of Σ, and con-
tractible otherwise.
176                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   The defining property characterizes an equivariant universal Σ-space up to Σ⋊G-
equivariant weak homotopy equivalence. The space EG Σ is the total space of the
universal G-equivariant principal Σ-bundle. It can be constructed as a Σ ⋊ G-CW
complex, with cells of the form S × Dm , where S is a Σ-free Σ ⋊ G-set. We will
always assume our equivariant universal Σ-spaces are Σ ⋊ G-CW complexes, in
which case the characterization is up to equivariant homotopy equivalence.
   The symmetric powers of a cofibrant spectrum are rarely cofibrant. However
they still have very good homotopy theoretic properties. Our main result is the
following.
Proposition B.109. Suppose that X → Y is a cofibration between cofibrant Σ⋊G-
equivariant I-diagrams. In the square of G-spectra

(B.110)               (EG Σ)+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I        / (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I
                                 Σ                         Σ

                             ∼                             ∼
                                                          
                         ∂X SymIΣ Y                   / SymI Y ,
                                                             Σ

every object is flat, the upper row is a cofibration between cofibrant objects, the
vertical maps are weak equivalences, and the bottom row is an h-cofibration. The
horizontal maps are weak equivalences if X → Y is.
Remark B.111. By Proposition B.59 the maps in (B.110) asserted to be weak
equivalences remain so after smashing with any spectrum Z.
Remark B.112. The situation that comes up in studying the free commutative
algebra functor is that X → Y is a cofibration of cofibrant G-spectra, regarded as a
ΣI ⋊G-spectrum through the map to G, and then regarded as a constant equivariant
I-diagram. This map of equivariant I-diagrams is cofibrant by Proposition B.75,
and so Proposition B.109 applies.
  Along the way to proving Proposition B.109 we will also show
Proposition B.113. The functors (EG Σ)+ ∧ ( − )∧I and SymIΣ ( − ) take weak
                                                  Σ
equivalences between cofibrant objects to weak equivalences.
Remark B.114. Proposition B.109 is part the reason for the positive condition in
the model structure we have chosen. The result is not true for general cellular
objects described in §B.3.7, though it is true for cellular object built from cells of
the form G+ ∧ S −V ∧ D+  k
                            with V non-zero. The condition that V is non-zero is
              H
used in the proof of Proposition B.117.
   We assertions about the top row in Proposition B.109 are most easily analyzed
in the arrow category SB
                       1
                         IG
                            .
Lemma B.115. The functor
                                              B       I
                          EG Σ+ ∧ ( − )∧I : S1 Σ⋊G → SG
                                                      1
                                     Σ

takes acyclic cofibrations between cofibrant objects to acyclic cofibrations between
cofibrant objects and hence weak equivalences between cofibrant objects to weak
equivalences between cofibrant objects.
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                            177


   Proof: Let X → Y be an acyclic cofibration. By working through an equivariant
cell decomposition of EG Σ and using SM7 for the topological enrichment we reduce
to showing that if S is a Σ-free Σ ⋊ G-set, then the map
                                 S+ ∧ X ∧I → S+ ∧ Y ∧I
                                      Σ               Σ
is an acyclic cofibration between cofibrant objects. This is an indexed wedge of
maps, indexed by the Σ-orbits O ⊂ S. The summand corresponding to O is the
map of GO -spectra
                             O+ ∧ X ∧I → O+ ∧ Y ∧I ,
                                      Σ               Σ
where GO ⊂ G is the subgroup of G preserving O. Since O is a Σ-torsor, this is
just the map of indexed smash products
                                               ′        ′
                                          X ∧I → Y ∧I
with I ′ = O × I, and is an acyclic cofibration between cofibrant objects by Proposi-
            Σ
tion B.102. The second assertion follows from the first by Ken Brown’s Lemma. 
  The vertical maps in (B.110) require a more detailed analysis.
Definition B.116. Suppose that Σ is a group with an action of G, and that X
is a Σ ⋊ G-spectrum. We will say that X is Σ-free as a G-spectrum if for each
orthogonal G-representation W the Σ-action on XW is free away from the base
point.
Proposition B.117. If X is a cofibrant Σ ⋊ G-equivariant I-diagram, and Z is
any Σ ⋊ G-spectrum then X ∧I ∧ Z is a Σ-free G-spectrum. The map
(B.118)               (EG Σ)+ ∧ (X ∧I ∧ Z) → (X ∧I ∧ Z)/Σ.
                                 Σ

is a weak equivalence in SG .
Remark B.119. We will mostly be interested in the case in which the Σ-action on
Z is trivial. In that case the equivalence (B.118) takes the form
                                            ∼
                        (EG Σ)+ ∧ X ∧I ∧ Z − → SymIΣ (X) ∧ Z
                                  Σ

Remark B.120. The proof of Proposition B.117 is nearly identical to that of [53,
Lemma III.8.4]. We go through the details because the statement is slightly more
general, and in order to correct a minor error in [53]. The statements of [53,
Lemma III.8.4], and the related [53, Lemma IV.4.5] both use EΣi , whereas the
object that should really be used is EG Σi . This makes the proofs of [53, Theorem
III.8.1] and [55, Theorem 4] on equivariant commutative rings incomplete. The
actual homotopical analysis of commutative rings is more or less equivalent to the
homotopical analysis of the norm. So it would seem that any correct treatment
needs to be built on the theory of the norm.

  Proof of Proposition B.117: For the first assertion, it suffices to show that if
A → B is a generating cofibration,
                                   A      /B


                                                     
                                          X0       / X1 ,
178                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is a pushout square, and X0∧I ∧ Z is Σ-free, then X1∧I ∧ Z is Σ-free. We use the
filtration described in §A.3.4 and consider the pushout square below
                   _                                 _
(B.121)                  X0∧I0 ∧ ∂A B ∧I1 ∧ Z     /       X0∧I0 ∧ B ∧I1 ∧ Z
                I=I0 ∐I1                                 I=I0 ∐I1
                 |I1 |=m                                  |I1 |=m


                                                                      
                       film−1 X1 ∧ Z                           / film X1 ∧ Z.

Since A → B is a cofibration, the map in the top row is an h-cofibration (Proposi-
tion B.97) hence a closed inclusion. It therefore suffices to show that Σ acts freely
away from the base point on the upper right term (see Remark A.9). Induction on
|I| reduces this to m = |I|. In this way the first assertion of the proposition reduces
to checking the special case
                                 X = p∨
                                      ∗S
                                         −V    k
                                            ∧ D+ ,
with p : I˜ → I a surjective map of Σ ⋊ G-sets and V an equivariant vector bundle
over I˜ having a nowhere vanishing invariant global section. Since the factor (D+
                                                                                k ∧I
                                                                                  )
can be absorbed into Z, we might as well suppose
                                    X = p∨
                                         ∗S
                                            −V
                                               .
The distributive law gives                  _
                                  X ∧I =         S −Vγ
                                           γ∈Γ
                                         ˜ and
where Γ is the Σ ⋊ G-set of sections I → I,
                                       M
                                  Vγ =     Vγ(i) .
                                           i∈I
For an orthogonal Σ ⋊ G-representation W we have, by Lemma A.18,
                     
                     ∗_                               dim W < dim Vγ
      (X ∧I ∧ Z)W =       O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W )+ ∧ ZUγ       dim W ≥ dim Vγ
                                         O(Uγ )
                           γ∈Γ

in which U = {Uγ } is any Σ ⋊ G-equivariant vector bundle over Γ with dim Uγ =
dim W − dim Vγ . We are interested in representations W which are pulled back
from the projection map Σ ⋊ G → G. In the first case there is nothing to prove. In
the second case the complement of the base point is homeomorphic to
                      a
                         O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W ) × (ZUγ − {∗})
                                             O(Uγ )
                       γ∈Γ

(see Remark A.9). The Σ-freeness then follows from the fact that this space has an
equivariant map to the disjoint union of Stiefel-manifolds
                   a                a
                      O(Vγ , W ) =     O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W )/O(Uγ ),
                    γ∈Γ              γ∈Γ

which is Σ-free since each Vγ(i) is non-zero, and Σ acts faithfully on I but trivially
on W .
  With one additional observation, a similar argument reduces the assertion about
weak equivalences to the same case
(B.122)                             X = p∨
                                         ∗S
                                            −V
                                               .
                               KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                     179


To spell it out, abbreviate (B.121) as
                                     K          /L

                                                  
                                     Y          / Y′
and form
                                                             ♭
               (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y o        (EG Σ)+ ∧ K                  / (EG Σ)+ ∧ L
                         Σ                      Σ                           Σ
                    ∼                     ∼                             ∼
                                                           ♭
                                                                        
                    Y /Σ o                K/Σ                       / L/Σ .
By Remark B.107 the rightmost maps in both rows are h-cofibrations, hence flat.
This means that if the vertical maps are weak equivalences then the map of pushouts
is a weak equivalence (Remark B.13). With this in hand, one now reduces the
                                            k−1
second claim to the cases X = p∨  ∗S
                                     −V
                                         ∧ S+   and X = p∨  ∗S
                                                               −V
                                                                  ∧ D+k
                                                                        . Absorbing
              k−1 ∧I          k ∧I
the factors (S+ ) and (D+ ) into Z completes the reduction to (B.122).
   With this X, the map on W -spaces induced by (B.118) is the identity map of
the terminal object if dim W < dim Vγ and otherwise the map of Σ-orbit spaces
induced by
              _                                  _
   (EG Σ)+ ∧      O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W )+ ∧ ZUγ →           O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W )+ ∧ ZUγ ,
                                    O(Uγ )                                       O(Uγ )
              γ∈Γ                                       γ∈Γ

in which U = {Uγ } is any Σ ⋊ G-equivariant vector bundle over Γ with dim Uγ =
dim W − dim Vγ . The proposition then follows from the fact that
                        a                     a
                EG Σ ×     O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W ) →     O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W )
                         γ∈Γ                           γ∈Γ

is an equivariant homotopy equivalence for the compact Lie group
                                 Y              
                          G =       O(Uγ ) ⋊ Σ ⋊ G.
                                   γ∈Γ

To see this, note that by [37, 36], both sides are G -CW complexes so it suffices to
check that the map is a weak equivalence of H-fixed point spaces for all H ⊂ G . If
the image of H in Σ ⋊ G is not a subgroup of Σ then EG ΣH is contractible
                                                                       Q     and the
map of fixed points is a homotopy equivalence. If H is a subgroup of O(Uγ ) then
it acts trivially on EG Σ, and once again EG ΣH is contractible. Finally, suppose
that there is an element h ∈ H whose image in Σ ⋊ G is a non-identity of Σ. Since
W is pulled back from a G-representation, this element acts trivially on W . If γ ∈ Γ
is not fixed by h then no point of O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W ) can be fixed by h. If γ ∈ Γ is
fixed by h, then h acts on Vγ . This action is non-trivial since Σ acts faithfully on
I. This means that O(Vγ ⊕ Uγ , W ) has no points fixed by h since h acts trivially
on W . Both sides therefore have empty H-fixed points in this case.                 

  Proof of Proposition B.109: The assertion that the upper arrow is a cofibration
between cofibrant objects and a weak equivalence if X → Y is, is contained in
Lemma B.115. Indeed consider the map of arrows
                                (X → Y ) → (Y → Y ).
180                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


If X → Y is a cofibration between cofibrant objects then both the domain and
range of the above map of arrows are cofibrant. By Lemma B.115 the map
                                                                        
    (EG Σ)+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I → (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I → (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I → (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I
               Σ                    Σ                      Σ                   Σ

is a map of cofibrant objects, which is a weak equivalence if X → Y is. This gives
the assertion about the upper row. The fact that the bottom row is an h-cofibration
is part of Remark B.107.
   For the remaining assertions it will be helpful to reference the expanded diagram
 (EG Σ)+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I ∧ Z        / (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I ∧ Z             / (EG Σ)+ ∧ (Y /X)∧I ∧ Z
           Σ                              Σ                             Σ


                                                                           
      ∂X SymIΣ Y ∧ Z                / SymIΣ Y ∧ Z                 / SymIΣ (Y /X) ∧ Z ,

in which Z is any G-spectrum. By Proposition B.117 the two right vertical maps
are weak equivalences. Since the left horizontal maps are h-cofibrations, hence flat,
this implies that the left vertical map is a weak equivalences. Taking Z = S 0 gives
the weak equivalence of the vertical arrows in the statement of Proposition B.109.
Letting Z vary through a weak equivalence and using the fact that cofibrant objects
are flat gives the flatness assertion. By what we have already proved, when X →
Y is a weak equivalence the vertical and top arrows in the left square are weak
equivalences, hence so is the bottom left map. This completes the proof.           

   Proof of Proposition B.113: Suppose that X → Y is a weak equivalence of
cofibrant objects, and consider the diagram
                       (EG Σ)+ ∧ X ∧I         / (EG Σ)+ ∧ Y ∧I
                                Σ                         Σ


                                                        
                           SymIΣ X                  / SymIΣ Y .

The vertical maps are weak equivalences by Proposition B.117. The top horizontal
map is a weak equivalence by Lemma B.115 (applied to, say, the map (∗ → X) →
(∗ → Y )). The bottom map is therefore a weak equivalence.                    

B.6.2. Iterated indexed and symmetric powers. In our analysis of the norms of com-
mutative rings in §B.8 we will encounter iterated indexed smash products and sym-
metric powers. These work out just to be other indexed smash or symmetric powers.
The point of this section is to spell this out.
  Suppose that I and J are G-sets and that X is an equivariant I × J-diagram.
The factorization
                                  I × J → J → pt
gives an isomorphism
(B.123)                        (X ∧I )∧J ≈ X ∧(I×J) ,
in which X ∧I is shorthand for p∧
                                ∗ X with p : I × J → J the projection mapping.
Applying this to the arrow category we get an isomorphism of the corner map
                              ∂X Y ∧(I×J) → X ∧(I×J)
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                              181


with the iterated corner map
                                    ∂W Z ∧J → Z ∧J
in which W → Z is the map
                                    ∂X Y ∧I → Y ∧I .
   There is also a version with symmetric powers. Suppose in addition that Σ ⊂ ΣI
is a G-stable subgroup. Then the action of ΣJ on I × J by
                               φ · (i, j) = (φ(j) · i, j)
is G-stable, making J × I into a ΣJ ⋊ G-set, and the projection map I × J → J
equivariant, with ΣJ ⋊ G acting on J through G. When X is a ΣJ ⋊ G-equivariant
J × I-diagram, the isomorphism (B.123) is ΣJ ⋊ G-equivariant. Passing to orbits
gives an isomorphism of G-spectra
(B.124)                     (SymIΣ X)∧J ≈ SymI×J
                                             ΣJ X.
By working in the arrow category we get an isomorphism of the corner map
                            ∂X SymI×J       I×J
                                  ΣJ Y → SymΣJ Y
with the iterated indexed corner map
(B.125)                             ∂W Z ∧J → Z ∧J
in which W → Z is the map
                               ∂X SymIΣ Y → SymIΣ Y.
  Our analysis of the homotopy properties of symmetric powers depended on a
convenient cofibrant approximation. Let EG Σ be a universal G-equivariant Σ space.
The above discussion leads to an isomorphism
                                    ∧J
                       EG Σ+ ∧ X ∧I     ≈ EG ΣJ+ ∧ X ∧(I×J) ,
                               Σ                        ΣJ
and an identification of the corner map
                                    ∂W̃ Z̃ ∧J → Z̃ ∧J
in which W̃ → Z̃ is the map
                                                             
                             EG Σ+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I → Y ∧I
                                        Σ

with                                                  
                       EG ΣJ + ∧ ∂X Y ∧(I×J) → Y ∧(I×J) .
                                   ΣJ
To reduce this expression to one we have already considered we need to know that
EG ΣJ is a universal equivariant ΣJ -space.
Lemma B.126. Let J be a finite G-set. If EG Σ is an equivariant universal Σ-space
then, under the product action, (EG Σ)J is an equivariant universal ΣJ -space.

   Proof: The functor T 7→ T J (from Σ ⋊ G-spaces to ΣJ ⋊ G-spaces) has a left
adjoint. To describe it, let M be the set Σ ⋊ G × J and define a left action of Σ ⋊ G
by the product of the translation action on Σ ⋊ G and the action of G on J. There
is a commuting right ΣJ ⋊ G-action
                                              
                       Σ ⋊ G × J × ΣJ ⋊ G → Σ ⋊ G × J.
182                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


whose component in the second factor is just the projection, and in the first factor
is composed of the evaluation map
                                J × ΣJ ⋊ G → Σ ⋊ G
and the right action of Σ ⋊ G on itself. The functor T 7→ T J can be identified with
                                      homΣ⋊G (M, T )
and so its left adjoint is given by
                                      S 7→ M      × S.
                                                ΣJ ⋊G

Breaking M into right ΣJ ⋊ G-orbits gives the decomposition
                                       a
                          M × S=           S/ΣJ−{j} .
                                ΣJ ⋊G
                                                j∈J

In this latter expression, the action of t ∈ Σ on s ∈ S/ΣJ−{j} can be computed as
the orbit class of σs, where σ ∈ ΣJ is any element with σ(j) = t. For example, the
entire Σ-action can be computed by restricting to the diagonal subgroup of ΣJ .
   Observe that a ΣJ ⋊ G-set S is ΣJ -free if and only if M × S is Σ-free. Clearly
                                                                        ΣJ ⋊G
         J                                       J−{j}
if S is Σ -free then for each j ∈ J, S/Σ          is Σ-free. On the other hand if
σ ∈ ΣJ is a non-identity element fixing s ∈ S, then there is a j ∈ J, with σ(j) not
the identity element. For this j we have σ(j) · ΣJ−{j} s = ΣJ−{j} s.
   Now to the proof. Let S be a finite ΣJ ⋊ G-set. We need to show that the space
of ΣJ ⋊ G-maps
                                    S → EG ΣJ
is empty or contractible depending on whether or not S has a point fixed by a non
identity element of ΣJ . By adjunction, this space can be identified with the space
of Σ ⋊ G-maps from
                                M × S → EG Σ,
                                       ΣJ ⋊G
and so the result follows from the observation above.                             
  We will be interested in the following case. Suppose that X → Y is a cofi-
bration of cofibrant ΣJ ⋊ G-equivariant I × J-diagrams. By Lemma B.126 and
Proposition B.109, in the diagram
                 (EG Σ)J+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧(I×J)               / (EG Σ)J+ ∧ Y ∧(I×J)
                          ΣJ                                       ΣJ

                           ∼                                            ∼
                                                                   
                      ∂X SymI×J
                              ΣJ Y
                                                            / SymI×J
                                                                  JΣ Y
every object is flat, the top row is a cofibration of cofibrant objects, the bottom
row is an h-cofibration, and the vertical maps are weak equivalences and remain
so after smashing with any spectrum. The same conclusion therefore holds for the
corresponding diagram of iterated indexed (symmetric) powers

                               ∂W̃ (Z̃ ∧(J) )          / Z̃ ∧(J)


                                                           
                               ∂W (Z ∧(J) )            / Z ∧(J)
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                183


in which
                                      W̃       / Z̃


                                                
                                      W        /Z
is the diagram
                        EG Σ+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I         / EG Σ+ ∧ Y ∧I
                               Σ                           Σ


                                                          
                          ∂X SymIΣ Y                  / SymIΣ Y .

   Working fiberwise leads to an analogous result about the indexed smash product
along a map q : J → K of finite G-sets. It plays an important role in our analysis of
the homotopy properties of the norms of commutative rings. Aside from the map
J → K of finite G-sets, the situation is the same as what we have been discussing
in this section. We have fixed a finite G-set I, a G-stable subgroup Σ ⊂ ΣI , and a
universal G-equivariant Σ-space EG Σ.
Proposition B.127. Let X → Y be a cofibration of cofibrant ΣJ ⋊ G-equivariant
I × J-diagrams and write
                              W̃       / Z̃


                                                
                                      W        /Z
for the diagram
                        EG Σ+ ∧ ∂X Y ∧I         / EG Σ+ ∧ Y ∧I
                               Σ                           Σ


                                                          
                          ∂X SymIΣ Y                  / SymIΣ Y.

In the G-equivariant K-diagram of corner maps

                            ∂W̃ (Z̃ ∧(J/K) )      / Z̃ ∧(J/K)


                                                       
                            ∂W (Z ∧(J/K) )        / Z ∧(J/K)

every object is flat, the vertical maps are weak equivalences after smashing with any
object, the upper map is a cofibration of cofibrant objects and the lower map is an
h-cofibration. The horizontal maps are weak equivalences if X → Y is.              
Remark B.128. The actual hypothesis on X → Y required for the fiberwise argu-
ment is that for each k ∈ K, the map X → Y is a cofibration of ΣJk ⋊Gk -equivariant
I ×Jk -diagram, where Jk ⊂ J is the inverse image of k, and Gk is the stabilizer of k.
For the sake of a cleaner statement we have made the slightly stronger assumption
that it is a cofibration of cofibrant ΣJ ⋊ G-equivariant I × J-diagrams. That this
implies the “fiberwise” hypothesis is a consequence of Proposition B.75.
184                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Remark B.129. As in Remark B.112, Proposition B.127 applies to the situation
which X → Y is a cofibration of cofibrant G-equivariant J-diagrams, regarded as
a Σ ⋊ G-equivariant I × J diagram by pulling back along the projection mappings
Σ ⋊ G → G and I × J → J.
B.7. Rings and modules. Aside from the alteration in model structure, the fol-
lowing is stated as [53, Theorem III.8.1]. The proof depends on our analysis of
symmetric powers, which, as mentioned in Remark B.120, makes essential use of
the norm.
Proposition B.130. The forgetful functor
                                 CommG → SG
creates a topological model category structure on CommG in which the fibrations
and weak equivalences in CommG are the maps that are fibrations and weak equiv-
alences in SG .

   Proof: Most of the proof is formal. One takes as generating cofibrations the
maps Sym A → Sym B where A → B ∈ Acof and generating acyclic cofibrations
the maps Sym A → Sym B with A → B ∈ Bacyclic. The only real point to check is
that if
(B.131)                       Sym A      / Sym B


                                               
                                 X            /Y
is a pushout diagram in which A → B is a generating acyclic cofibration, then
X → Y is a weak equivalence. That is contained in Lemma B.132 below. The rest
of the proof is left to the reader.                                         

Lemma B.132. Suppose that A → B is a map of G-spectra, and
                          Sym A      / Sym B


                                               
                                 X            /Y
is a pushout diagram of equivariant commutative rings. If A → B is an acyclic
cofibration of cofibrant objects, then X → Y is a weak equivalence.
   The proof of Lemma B.132 involves a filtration of Y by X-modules which we
will use again in §B.8. For a map A → B of G-spectra define
                                         _
                            film Sym B =   film Symn B
                                         n
                  n
where the film Sym B is obtained from the filtration described in §A.3.4 by passing
to Σn -orbits, and fits into a pushout square
              Symn−m A ∧ ∂A Symm B           / Symn−m A ∧ Symm B


                                                            
                   film−1 Symn (B)                  / film Symn B ,
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 185


with
                            ∂A Symm B = (∂A B ∧m ) /Σm .
Wedging over n one sees that the film B are Sym A-submodules, and that there is
a pushout square of A-modules
                    Sym A ∧ ∂A Symm B             / Sym A ∧ Symm B


                                                             
                        film−1 Sym B                  / film Sym B .

If a map X → Y of commutative rings fits into a pushout diagram
                                 Sym A           / Sym B


                                                     
                                   X               / Y,

we can define a filtration of Y by X-modules by
                            film Y = X     ∧     film Sym B.
                                         Sym A

Evidently these film Y are related by the pushout square of X-modules
(B.133)                 X ∧ ∂A Symm B             / X ∧ Symm B


                                                               
                             film−1 Y                     / film Y .


   Proof of Lemma B.132: We use the filtration just described. In the diagram (B.133),
if A → B is an acyclic cofibration between cofibrant objects, then
                               ∂A Symm B → Symm B
is a weak equivalence and an h-cofibration of flat spectra by Proposition B.109. It
follows that the bottom map is a weak equivalence.                               

Corollary B.134. For H ⊂ G, the adjoint functors
                                CommH ⇆ CommG
form a Quillen pair.


  Proof: The restriction functor obviously preserves the classes of fibrations and
weak equivalences.                                                               

Corollary B.135. The norm functor on commutative algebras
                              G
                             NH : CommH → CommG
is a left Quillen functor. It preserves the classes of cofibrations and acyclic cofibra-
tions, hence weak equivalences between cofibrant objects.
186                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Proof: This is immediate from Corollary B.134 and Proposition A.56. The
assertion about weak equivalences is Ken Brown’s Lemma (see, for example [34,
Lemma 1.1.12]).                                                            
   The category MR of left modules over an equivariant associative algebra R as
defined in §A.2.7. As pointed out there, when R is commutative, a left R-module
can be regarded as a right R-module, and MR becomes a symmetric monoidal
category under the operation
(B.136)                                      M ∧ N.
                                                 R
   The following result is a consequence of Propositions B.76, B.77 and [76, The-
orem 4.1]. Except for the slight change of model structure, it is [53, Theorem
III.7.6].
Proposition B.137. The forgetful functor
                                            M R → SG
creates a model structure on the category MR in which the fibrations and weak
equivalences are the maps which become fibrations and weak equivalences in SG .
When R is commutative, the operation (B.136) satisfies the pushout product and
monoid axioms making MR into a symmetric monoidal model category.            
   Though not explicitly stated, the following formal result was surely known to
the authors of [76] (see the proof of [76, Theorem 4.3].)
Corollary B.138. Let f : R → S be a map of equivariant associative algebras.
The functors
                         S ∧ ( − ) : MR ⇆ MS : U
                                R
given by restriction and extension of scalars form a Quillen pair. If S is cofibrant
as a left R-module, then the restriction functor is also a left Quillen functor.

   Proof: Proposition B.137 implies that the restriction functor preserves fibrations
and acyclic fibrations. This gives the first assertion. The second follows from
the fact that the restriction functor preserves colimits, and the consequence of
Proposition B.137 that the generating (acyclic) cofibrations for MS are formed as
the smash product of S with the generating (acyclic) cofibrations for SG .         
   The following result is [53, Proposition III.7.7]. Using the fact that h-cofibrations
are flat, the proof reduces to checking the case M = G+ ∧ S −V ∧ R, which is
                                                                H
Proposition B.58.
Proposition B.139. Suppose that R is an associative algebra, and M is a cofibrant
right R-module. The functor M ∧ ( − ) preserves weak equivalences.             
                                    R
  In other words, the functor M ∧ ( − ) is flat if M is cofibrant, and so need not
                                        R
be derived.
Corollary B.140. Suppose that R is an associative algebra, M a cofibrant right
R-module. If N → N ′ a map of left R-modules whose underlying map of spectra is
an h-cofibration, then the sequence
                         M ∧ N → M ∧ N ′ → M ∧ (N ′ /N )
                            R                R         R
is weakly equivalent to a cofibration sequence.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                187


   Note that the assumption is not that N → N ′ is an h-cofibration in the category
of left R-modules. In that case the result would not require any hypothesis on M .

  Proof: We must show that the map from the mapping cone of
(B.141)                          M ∧ N → M ∧ N′
                                      R                R
           ′
to M ∧ (N /N ) is a weak equivalence. The mapping cone of (B.141) is isomorphic
     R
to
                                M ∧ (N ′ ∪ CN ),
                                        R
and the spectrum underlying the R-module mapping cone N ′ ∪ N is the mapping
cone formed in spectra. Since N → N ′ is an h-cofibration, the map N ′ ∪ CN →
N ′ /N is a weak equivalence (Proposition B.20). The result now follows from Propo-
sition B.139.                                                                    
   Corollary B.140 can be used to show that many constructions derived from the
formation of monomial ideals have good homotopy theoretic properties. It is used
in §2.4.3 and in §6.1. In those cases the map of spectra underlying N → N ′ is the
inclusion of a wedge summand, and so obviously an h-cofibration.

B.8. Indexed smash products of commutative rings.

B.8.1. Description of the problem. Proposition B.105 asserts that the indexed smash
product functor
                                ( − )∧J : SBJ G → SG
has a left derived functor
                                  L
                              ( − )∧J : ho SBJ G → ho SG
which can be computed by applying the norm to a cofibrant approximation. We
also know from Corollary B.134 (and the fact that coproducts of weak equivalences
are weak equivalences) that the restriction functor and its left adjoint form a Quillen
pair
                        p! : comm SBJ G ⇆ comm SG : p∗ .
Furthermore, the following diagram commutes in which the vertical functors are
the forgetful functors (Corollary A.56)
                                              p!
                             comm SBJ G                / comm SG

                                                             
                               SB J G                      / SG .
                                            ( − )∧J

However, what we really want is the commutativity of the following diagram
                                             Lp!
                         ho comm SBJ G                 / ho comm SG

                                                               
                             ho SBJ G              L
                                                           / ho SG
                                            ( − )∧J
188                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


in which the vertical maps are the forgetful functors (which are homotopical, so
don’t need to be derived), and the horizontal arrows are the left derived functors
indicated. The point of this section is to establish this.
   To clarify the issue, suppose that R ∈ comm SBJ G is a cofibrant J-diagram of
commutative rings. Let R̃ → R be a cofibrant approximation of the underlying
J-diagram of spectra. What needs to be checked is that the map
(B.142)                           (R̃)∧J → (R)∧J
is a weak equivalence. The proof involves an elaboration of the notion of flatness.
To motivate it we describe a bit of the argument.
   The main point in the proof is to investigate the situation of a pushout diagram
of equivariant J-diagrams of commutative rings
                               Sym A        / Sym B


                                                
                                 R1           / R2

in which the top row is constructed by applying the symmetric algebra functor Sym
to a generating cofibration A → B, and in which one knows that the map (B.142)
is a weak equivalence for R = R1 . One would like to conclude that (B.142) is a
weak equivalence for R = R2 .
   To pass from R1 to R2 we use the R1 -module filtration described after the
statement of Lemma B.132, whose stages fit into a pushout square
(B.143)               R1 ∧ ∂A Symm B          / R1 ∧ Symm B


                                                        
                          film−1 R2                / film R2 ,

where
                           ∂A Symm B = (∂A B ∧m ) /Σm .
The filtration of §A.3.4 mediates between (film−1 R2 )∧J and (film R2 )∧J by another
sequence of pushout squares. The upper right hand corner of a typical stage is an
indexed wedge of terms of the form
(B.144)                (film−1 R2 )∧J0 ∧ (R1 ∧ Symm B)∧J1 ,
indexed by the set-theoretic decompositions J = J0 ∐ J1 .
   We need to know two things about this expression. One is that the left derived
functor of its formation (in all variables) is computed in terms of the expression
itself, and the other is that formation of each of the pushout squares we encounter
is homotopical. Motivated by this we are led to consider a technical condition
slightly stronger than the requirement that (B.142) be a weak equivalence. That is
the subject of the next section.

B.8.2. Very flat diagrams. As in §B.6.2, to make the diagrams more readable we
will use the notation
                                X ∧(K/L) = q∗∧ X
for the indexed smash product along a map q : K → L of finite G-sets.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               189


Definition B.145. An equivariant J-diagram X very flat if it has the following
property: for every cofibrant approximation X̃ → X, every diagram of finite G-sets
                                          p          q
                                     J←
                                      −K−
                                        → L,
and every weak equivalence of equivariant L-diagrams Z̃ → Z, the map
(B.146)                  (p∗ X̃)∧(K/L) ∧ Z̃ → (p∗ X)∧(K/L) ∧ Z
is a weak equivalence.
  Our main goal is to establish the following result.
Proposition B.147. If R ∈ SBJ G is cofibrant commutative ring, then the equi-
variant J-diagram of spectra underlying R is very flat.
   The condition that R be very flat certainly implies that (B.142) is a weak equiv-
alence. Proposition B.147 therefore implies
Corollary B.148. The following diagram of left derived functors commutes up to
natural isomorphism
                                               Lp!
                          ho comm SBJ G                  / ho comm SG

                                                                
                             ho SBJ G             L
                                                            / ho SG .
                                              ( − )∧J

                                                                                    
Remark B.149. Since identity maps are weak equivalences, the condition of being
very flat implies that every arrow in the diagram

                     (p∗ X̃)∧(K/L) ∧ Z̃               / (p∗ X̃)∧(K/L) ∧ Z


                                                               
                     (p∗ X)∧(K/L) ∧ Z̃                / (p∗ X)∧(K/L) ∧ Z

is a weak equivalence. In particular it implies that (p∗ X)∧(K/L) is flat.
Remark B.150. Since X̃ ∧(K/L) is cofibrant (Proposition B.89), and cofibrant objects
are flat (Proposition B.58), the top arrow in the above diagram is always a weak
equivalence. It therefore suffices to check the very flat condition when Z̃ → Z is
the identity map.
Remark B.151. If (B.146) is a weak equivalence for one cofibrant approximation it
is a weak equivalence for any cofibrant approximation. It therefore suffices to check
the “very flat” condition for a single cofibrant approximation X̃ → X.
Lemma B.152. Arbitrary wedges of very flat spectra are very flat. Smash products
of very flat spectra are very flat. Filtered colimits of very flat G-diagrams along h-
cofibrations are very flat.

   Proof: The first assertion follows easily from the distributive law, and the fact
that the formation of indexed wedges is homotopical. The second follows from the
190                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


fact that the formation of indexed smash products is symmetric monoidal. The
third makes use of Proposition A.69. The details are left to the reader.  

Example B.153. Here is one motivation for the definition of “very flat.” Suppose
we are given a pushout square of equivariant J-diagrams
                                      A           /B

                                                   
                                      X           /Y

and we are interested in the filtration of Y ∧(K/L) described in §A.3.4, whose stages
are related by pushout squares
                    _                                  _
(B.154)                    X ∧K0 ∧ ∂A B ∧K1         /        X ∧K0 ∧ B ∧K1
                 (ℓ,K1 )∈Gn                             (ℓ,K1 )∈Gn


                                                                      
                        filn−1 Y ∧K/L                         / filn Y ∧K/L ,

where Gn = Gn (K/L) is the G-set of pairs (ℓ, K1 ) with ℓ ∈ L and K1 ⊂ q −1 (ℓ) a
subset of cardinality n, and the map Gn → L sends (ℓ, K1 ) to ℓ. For (ℓ, K1 ) ∈ Gn
we have written K0 to denote the complement of K1 in q −1 (ℓ).
   The condition that B be very flat gives some control over the upper right term.
To see this let Vn = Vn (K/L) be the set of triples (ℓ, K1 , k) with (ℓ, K1 ) ∈ Gn and
k ∈ K1 . We define maps
                                        f     g
                                      − Vn −
                                     J←    → Gn
by
                                f (ℓ, K1 , k) = q(k)
                                 g(ℓ, K1 , k) = (ℓ, K1 ).
The spectra X ∧K0 form an equivariant Gn -diagram, which we denote Z. The B ∧K1
are the constituents of (f ∗ B)∧(Vn /Gn ) , and so the indexed wedge occurring in the
pushout square is
                               _
                                  Z ∧ (f ∗ B)∧(Vn /Gn ) .
                                Gn

Since the formation of indexed wedges is homotopical, its homotopy properties come
down to understanding the homotopy properties of the equivariant Gn -diagram
Z ∧ f ∗ B ∧(Vn /Gn ) , some of which are specified by the condition that B be very flat.
   By replacing the category of equivariant J-diagrams with its arrow category,
we arrive at the notion of a very flat object of S1BJ G . The formal properties of
being very flat persist in this context, and in particular the analogues of Re-
marks B.149, B.150, B.151 and Lemma B.152 hold.
   To get a feel for the more particular aspects of very flat arrows, suppose that
(A → B) is an object of S1BJ G , and (Ã → B̃) is a cofibrant approximation. Consider
a weak equivalence of the form
                                (X̃ → ∗) → (X → ∗).
                                  KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                      191


In this case the very flat condition becomes that
              (p∗ (B̃/Ã)∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ → ∗) → (p∗ (B/A)∧(K/L) ∧ X → ∗)
is a weak equivalence. This is so if and only if B/A is very flat.
   Next consider a weak equivalence of the form
                                     (∗ → X̃) → (∗ → X).
The very flat condition in this case is that

  (∂p∗ Ã p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ → p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) ∧ X̃)
                                             → (∂p∗ A p∗ B ∧(K/L) ∧ X → p∗ B ∧(K/L) ∧ X)
is a weak equivalence. This holds if and only if B is very flat and (A → B) satisfies
the condition that
(B.155)                ∂p∗ Ã p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ → ∂p∗ A p∗ B ∧(K/L) ∧ X
is a weak equivalence. If we happen to know that the indexed corner maps
                                  ∂p∗ Ã p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) → B̃ ∧(K/L)

and

                                  ∂p∗ A p∗ B ∧(K/L) → B ∧(K/L)
are h-cofibrations then the leftmost horizontal maps in

       ∂p∗ Ã p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) ∧ X̃         / p∗ B̃ ∧(K/L) ∧ X̃         / p∗ (B̃/Ã)∧(K/L) ∧ X̃


                                                                             
       ∂p∗ A p∗ B ∧(K/L) ∧ X            / p∗ B ∧(K/L) ∧ X           / p∗ (B/A)∧(K/L) ∧ X

are h-cofibrations, hence flat. Thus the middle and left vertical arrows are weak
equivalences if and only if the middle and right vertical arrows are, or in other words
if and only if both B and B/A are very flat. So in the presence of the condition
above, a necessary condition that (A → B) be a very flat arrow is that B and B/A
are very flat. This turns out to be sufficient. We single out the condition.
                                         p        q
Condition B.156. For every J ←
                             −K−
                               → L the corner map
                            ∂p∗ A (p∗ B)∧(K/L) → (p∗ B)∧(K/L)
is an h-cofibration.
Remark B.157. By Proposition B.96 and the monoid axiom for S1BL G , a cofibrant
object (A → B) of S1BJ G is very flat and satisfies Condition B.156.
Lemma B.158. If A1 → A2 satisfies Condition B.156, and both A1 and A2 /A1
are very flat, then A = (A1 → A2 ) is very flat.


  Proof: Fix a diagram of finite G-sets
                                              p       q
                                          J←
                                           −K −
                                              →L
192                            M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


let Ã = (Ã1 → Ã2 ) be a cofibrant approximation to A = (A1 → A2 ), and
                                                         X̃ → X
                                                     X̃ = (X̃1 → X̃2 )
                                                     X = (X1 → X2 )
a weak equivalence in S1BL G .                    By Remark B.157, Ã also satisfies the conditions of
the lemma. Let
                                                     X ′ → X → X ′′
be the sequence
                                  (∗ → X2 ) → (X1 → X2 ) → (X1 → ∗).
and X̃ → X̃ → X̃ the analogous sequence for X̃. The maps X ′ → X and X̃ ′ → X̃
        ′                  ′

are not h-cofibrations, but they are so objectwise, and hence flat.
   Consider the diagram
(B.159)             p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ ′                  / p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃           / p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ ′′


                                                                                             
                    p∗ A∧(K/L) ∧ X ′                    / p∗ A∧(K/L) ∧ X             / p∗ A∧(K/L) ∧ X ′′ .

Our aim is to show that the middle vertical map is a weak equivalence.
   The first step is to show that the left horizontal maps are flat. This reduces us
to checking that the left and right vertical maps are weak equivalences. For this,
let’s examine the bottom left horizontal map in more detail. It is given by
                                ∧(K/L)                      ∧(K/L)                             ∧(K/L)
(B.160)       (∂p∗ A1 p∗ A2              ∧ X2 → p∗ A2                 ∧ X2 ) → (C → p∗ A2               ∧ X2 )
in which C is defined by the pushout diagram
                                         ∧(K/L)                       / p∗ A∧(K/L) ∧ X1
(B.161)                        ∂p∗ A1 p∗ A2            ∧ X1               2


                                                                               
                                         ∧(K/L)
                               ∂p∗ A1 p∗ A2            ∧ X2                   /C .

When A1 → A2 satisfies Condition B.156 the top map in (B.161) is an h-cofibration,
hence so is the bottom map. This means that (B.160) is an objectwise h-cofibration,
and so flat. Since Ã1 → Ã2 also satisfies Condition B.156 the upper left horizontal
map in (B.159) is also flat. Thus we are reduced to checking that the maps
                                    p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ ′ → p∗ A(∧K/L) ∧ X ′
                                   p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃ ′′ → p∗ A(∧K/L) ∧ X ′′
are weak equivalences. As described above, this fact for the second map follows
from the assumption that A2 /A1 is very flat. The assertion in the case of the first
map is that the middle and left vertical arrows in
                  ∧(K/L)                           / p∗ Ã∧(K/L) ∧ X̃2
      ∂p∗ Ã1 p∗ Ã2            ∧ X̃2                   2
                                                                               / p∗ (Ã2 /Ã1 )∧(K/L) ∧ X̃2

               ∴∼                                                 ∼                                ∼
                                                                                             
                  ∧(K/L)                           / p∗ A∧(K/L) ∧ X2
      ∂p∗ A1 p∗ A2              ∧ X2                    2
                                                                               / p∗ (A2 /A1 )∧(K/L) ∧ X2
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               193


are weak equivalences. Since A2 and A2 /A1 are very flat, the middle and right
vertical maps are weak equivalences. Condition B.156 shows that the left horizontal
maps are h-cofibrations, hence flat. It follows that the left vertical map is a weak
equivalence.                                                                      
   We can now establish an important technical fact used in the proof of Proposi-
tion B.147.
Lemma B.162. Suppose that A → B is a cofibrant object of S1BJ G , I is a G-set
and Σ ⊂ ΣI a G-stable subgroup. Then
                    SymIΣ (A → B) = (∂A SymIΣ B → SymIΣ B)
is very flat.

   Proof: Proposition B.127 implies that in this situation the map SymIΣ (A →
B) satisfies Condition B.156, and that for every cofibrant B, SymIΣ B is very flat
(so both SymIΣ B and SymIΣ (B/A) are very flat). The result then follows from
Lemma B.158.                                                                    

Example B.163. Continuing with Example B.153, the top map in (B.154) arises
naturally in the arrow category as
                            _
                                 Z ∧ (p∗ (A → B)∧(K/L) ),
                         Gn (K/L)

where Z is the identity arrow of the diagram X ∧J0 . Since the formation of indexed
wedges is homotopical, the information in the homotopy type of this expression is
contained in the Gn (K/L)-diagram Z ∧ (p∗ (A → B)∧(K/L) ). The condition that
(A → B) be very flat thus specifies good homotopical properties of the top map
in (B.154).
Lemma B.164. Consider a pushout square
(B.165)                       A       /B

                                              
                                    X        /Y
in which (A → B) is a very flat object of S1BJ G satisfying Condition B.156. If X is
very flat, then so is Y .

   Proof: Using the fact that cofibrations are flat, we can arrange things so that
the cofibrant approximation Ỹ → Y fits into a pushout square
(B.166)                              Ã      / B̃

                                               
                                    X̃       / Ỹ
of cofibrant approximations to (B.165), in which Ã → B̃ is a cofibration. We give
Ỹ ∧(K/L) and Y ∧(K/L) the filtration described in §A.3.4. We will prove by induction
on n that for any weak equivalence Z̃ → Z of equivariant J-diagrams, the map
(B.167)                    filn Ỹ ∧K ∧ Z̃ → filn Y ∧K ∧ Z
194                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is a weak equivalence. The case n = 0 is the assertion that X is very flat, which is
true by assumption. For the inductive step, consider the diagram
                        _                                _
   filn−1 Ỹ ∧K ∧ Z̃ o      X̃ ∧K0 ∧ ∂Ã B̃ ∧K1 ∧ Z̃   /     X̃ ∧K0 ∧ B̃ ∧K1 ∧ Z̃
                       Gn (K/L)                                  Gn (L)



                        _                                       _            
  filn−1 Y ∧K ∧ Z o            sX ∧K0 ∧ ∂A B ∧K1 ∧ Z        /             X ∧K0 ∧ B ∧K1 ∧ Z .
                       Gn (K/L)                                 Gn (K/L)

The map from the pushout of the top row to the pushout of the bottom row
is (B.167). The rightmost horizontal maps are h-cofibrations by Condition B.156.
The left vertical map is a weak equivalence by induction, and the other two vertical
maps are weak equivalences since (A → B) is very flat (Example B.163). The map
of pushouts is therefore a weak equivalence since h-cofibrations are flat.        

B.8.3. Proof of Proposition B.147. Since the class of very flat G-diagrams is closed
under the formation of filtered colimits along h-cofibrations (Lemma B.152), it
suffices to show that if A → B is a generating cofibration in SBJ G ,
                                  Sym A       / Sym B


                                                  
                                    X            /Y
is a pushout square of commutative J-algebras, and X is very flat, then Y is very
flat. Working fiberwise, the filtration described after the statement of Lemma B.132
gives a filtration of Y by X-modules, whose stages are related by the pushout
squares
(B.168)                  X ∧ ∂A Symm B          / X ∧ Symm B


                                                            
                             film−1 Y                  / film Y .

We show by induction on m that each film Y is very flat. Since fil0 Y = X, the
induction starts. The arrow (∂A Symm B → Symm B) is very flat by Lemma B.162.
This means that the top row of (B.168) is a very flat arrow, since smash products
of very flat objects are very flat (Lemma B.152). This places us in the situation of
Lemma B.164 which completes the inductive step.
B.9. The slice tower, symmetric powers and the norm. The main goal of
this section is to show that if R is an equivariant commutative ring in SG   ≥0 , and
n ≥ 0 is an integer, then the slice section P n R is also an equivariant commutative
ring in SG≥0 . The proof makes use of the technology used to show that cofibrant
commutative rings are very flat, and so has been deferred to this appendix. The
reader may wish to look through the first three subsections of §4 for the basic
definitions concerning the slice tower.
   Our presentation of the slice tower was made in a context where the emphasis was
on homotopy theory, and the slice sections P n , etc were characterized by homotopy
theoretic properties. Here we will be making use of some explicit constructions, and
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 195


some care needs to be taken to ensure that the derived functors we are ultimately
interested in can be computed on the objects that arise. Using the fact that indexed
smash products of cofibrant objects are cofibrant, and that indexed symmetric
powers of cofibrant spectra are flat, one can check that this is indeed the case. We
will take as the definition of P n the colimit of the inductive construction described
in §4.2, using the cofibrant approximations S −1 ∧ S 1 ∧ G+ ∧ S kρH and S −1 ∧
                                                                  H
S 1 ∧ G+ ∧ S kρH −1 for the slice cells. This particular choice of P n is homotopical,
          H
and the natural map X → P n X is a cofibration. Our task will be to show that
something functorially weakly equivalent to P n takes commutative rings in SG      ≥0 to
                          G
commutative rings in S≥0 .
   We begin with the interaction of the slice filtration with the formation of indexed
smash products. As in §B.5 we fix a finite G-set and work with the homotopy theory
of equivariant J-diagrams. We define slice cells and the slice filtration in the evident
manner, so that the slice filtration on equivariant J-diagrams corresponds to the
product of slice filtrations on Gt -spectra under the equivalence
                                             Y
                                    SB J G ≈    SG t ,
                                              t

   The proposition below follows easily from Proposition 4.13.
Proposition B.169. Suppose that J is a non-empty G-set, X is a cofibrant equi-
variant J-diagram, and n is an integer. If each Xj is slice (n − 1) positive, then
the indexed wedge
                                     _
                                        Xj
                                        j∈J

is slice (n − 1) positive.                                                            
   The next two results make use of the implication
(B.170)                 X ≥0     and Y ≥ k =⇒ X ∧ Y ≥ k
proved in §4.3 (Proposition 4.26).
Proposition B.171. Suppose that J is a non-empty G-set, X is a cofibrant equi-
variant J-diagram, and n ≥ 0 is an integer. If each Xj is slice (n − 1) positive,
then the indexed smash product
                                    ^
                                       Xj
                                        j∈J

is slice (n − 1) positive.


   Proof: By induction on |G| we may suppose that i∗H X ∧J is slice (n − 1)-positive
for any proper subgroup H ⊂ G. This implies that T ∧ X ∧J ≥ n if T is any G-CW
complex built entirely from induced G-cells. Since the formation of indexed smash
products commutes with filtered colimits, it suffices by Proposition 4.15 to consider
a cofibration A → B of equivariant J-diagrams in which B/A is a wedge of slice
cells of dimension greater than n, and show that
(B.172)                        A∧J ≥ n =⇒ B ∧J ≥ n.
196                      M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Using the filtration of §A.3.4 for the identity pushout square
                                          A           /B


                                                      
                                          A           /B,

gives a filtration of B ∧J whose stages fit into cofibration sequences
                                               _
(B.173)             film−1 B ∧J → film B ∧J →     A∧J0 ∧ (B/A)∧J1
in which the indexing
               `       G-set for the coproduct is the set of all set theoretic decompo-
sition J = J0 J1 with |J1 | = m. The implication (B.170) and Proposition B.169
above reduce the claim to showing that if J1 6= ∅, then (B/A)∧J1 (regarded as an
equivariant spectrum for the stabilizer of J1 ) is slice (n−1)-positive. In other words,
it suffices to prove the proposition when X is a wedge of slice cells of dimension
greater than or equal to n.
   Making use of the distributive law, and once again (B.170) and Proposition B.169,
one reduces to the case in which J = G/H is a single orbit, and X corresponds to
S kρH with k|H| ≥ n or S kρH −1 , with k|H| − 1 ≥ n. In the first case
                                         X ∧J ≈ S kρG
has dimension k|G| ≥ k|H| ≥ n. In the second case
                                     X ∧J ≈ S (n−1)ρG +V
where V = ρG − indG                    G
                     H 1. Write W = indH −1 so that S
                                                      W
                                                        ∧ S V ≈ S ρG −1 , and there
is a cofibration sequence
(B.174)                  S(W )+ ∧ X ∧J → X ∧J → S (n−1)ρG +(ρG −1) .
The G-space S(W ) is homeomorphic to the boundary of the simplex with vertices
G/H, and has no G-fixed points. The barycentric subdivision gives S(W )+ the
structure of a G-CW complex built entirely from induced G-cells. It therefore
follows from our induction hypothesis that
                                        S(W )+ ∧ X ∧J
is slice (n − 1)-positive. The rightmost term in (B.174) is a slice cell of dimension
                                  k|G| − 1 ≥ k|H| − 1 ≥ n
                    ∧J
It follows that X        is slice (n − 1)-positive.                                  

Remark B.175. We will later need to know that in the situation of Proposition B.171,
one has
(B.176)                               Σ−1 (ΣX)∧J ≥ n.
To see this, rewrite the spectrum in (B.176) as
                                    Σ−1 (S 1 )∧J ) ∧ (X ∧J ).
The factor Σ−1 (S 1 )∧J is weakly equivalent to the sphere S V with V = RJ − 1.
This gives
                                  Σ−1 (S 1 )∧J ≥ 0
and the relation (B.176) then follows from Proposition B.171 and (B.170).
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             197


   We next turn to indexed symmetric powers. As in §B.6 we consider a finite G-set
I, a G-stable subgroup Σ ⊂ ΣI , and the indexed symmetric power
                                    SymIΣ X = X ∧I /Σ.
Proposition B.177. Let n ≥ 0 be an integer, I a non-empty G-set, and X a
cofibrant equivariant I-diagram. If X is slice (n − 1)-positive then both the indexed
symmetric power SymIΣ X and Σ−1 SymIΣ (ΣX) are slice (n − 1)-positive.

  Proof: Using the equivalences
                             (EG Σ)+ ∧ X ∧I ≈ SymIΣ X
                                         Σ

                     Σ−1 (EG Σ)+ ∧ (ΣX)∧I ≈ Σ−1 SymIΣ (ΣX)
                                     Σ

of Proposition B.117 and working through an equivariant cell decomposition of
EG Σ reduces the claim to showing that
(B.178)                 S+ ∧ X ∧I        and Σ−1 S+ ∧ (ΣX)∧I
                            Σ                         Σ

are slice (n − 1)-positive when S is a finite Σ-free Σ ⋊ G-set. But the first spectrum
in (B.178) is an indexed wedge of indexed smash products of X (see the proof of
Lemma B.115), hence slice (n − 1)-positive by Propositions B.171 and B.169. The
second spectrum is an indexed wedge of desuspensions of indexed smash products
of ΣX, hence slice (n − 1)-positive by Remark B.175 and Proposition B.169.           
                                                                        n
   We can now investigate the slice sections of commutative rings. Let Palg :
        G            G                                  n
Comm → Comm be the multiplicative analogue of P , constructed as the
colimit of a sequence of functors
                                W0alg R → W1alg R → · · · .
The Wialg R are defined inductively starting with W0alg R = R, and in which Wkalg R
is defined by the pushout square
                            _                    _          
                      Sym      Σt Sb        / Sym    C Σt Sb
                                I                         I


                                                        
                           alg                      / W alg R
                          Wk−1 R                          k

in which the indexing set I is the set of maps Σt Sb → Wk−1   alg
                                                                  R with Sb > n a
                                                  n
cofibrant slice cell and t ≥ 0. The functor Palg is homotopical and for any R,
                  n
the map R → Palg    R is a cofibration of equivariant commutative rings. The arrow
         n
R → Palg R is characterized up to weak equivalence by the following universal
property: if S is an equivariant commutative ring whose underlying spectrum is
slice (n + 1)-null then the map
                    ho CommG (Palg
                               n
                                   R, S) → ho CommG (R, S)
is an isomorphism.
   For clarity let’s temporarily denote by U , the forgetful functor
                                    U : CommG → SG .
198                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL

                                                 n
By the small object argument, the spectrum U Palg  R is slice (n + 1)-null, so there
is a natural transformation
                               P n U R → U Palg
                                            n
                                                R
of functors to SG .
Proposition B.179. If R is a slice (−1)-positive cofibrant equivariant commutative
ring, then for all n ∈ Z, the map
                                   P n U R → U Palg
                                                n
                                                    R
is a weak equivalence.


   Proof: When n is negative, P n U R is contractible, and Palg
                                                             n
                                                                R is a commutative
ring whose unit is nullhomotopic, hence also contractible. We may therefore assume
n is non-negative.
   It suffices to show that each of the maps
                                    alg
                                 U Wk−1 R → U Wkalg R
is a P n -equivalence. We do this by working through the filtration used in the proof
of Lemma B.132, whose successive terms are related by the homotopy cocartesian
square
                    alg                             / U W alg R ∧ Symm B
                 U Wk−1 R ∧ ∂A Symm B                    k−1


                                                                
                       film−1 Wkalg R                    / film W alg R ,
                                                                 k

in which A → B is the map
                                 _              _
(B.180)                               Σt Sb →            b
                                                    C Σt S.
                                  I             I

By induction we may assume that the maps
                                    alg
                           U R → U Wk−1 R → film−1 Wkalg R

are P n equivalences, and so among other things that the three spectra are all in SG
                                                                                   ≥0 .
                                alg            alg         alg      −1      m
The homotopy fiber of film−1 Wk R → film W R is U Wk−1 R ∧ Σ Sym (B/A).
Now B/A is the suspension of the left term in (B.180) which is slice n-positive. It
follows (Proposition B.177) that Σ−1 Symm (B/A) is also slice n-positive hence so
       alg                                alg
is U Wk−1  R ∧ Σ−1 Symm (B/A) since U Wk−1    R ≥ 0. The fact that film−1 Wkalg R →
       alg        n
film W R is a P -equivalence is now a consequence of Lemma 4.28.                    


B.10. Geometric and monoidal geometric fixed points. The geometric fixed
point functor was defined and its main properties summarized in §2.5.2. In this
section we gives proofs of some of these properties, and describe the variation
constructed in Mandell-May [53, §V.4]. We refer to the Mandell-May construction
as the monoidal geometric fixed point functor and denote it ΦG
                                                             M , in order not to
confuse it with the usual geometric fixed point functor.
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                199


B.10.1. Geometric fixed points. The geometric fixed point functor was defined in §2.5.2
by
                                                   G
                            ΦG (X) = (ẼP ∧ X)f ,
in which the G-CW complex ẼP is the one characterized up to equivariant homo-
topy equivalence by the property
                                      (
                                 H     S0 H = G
                             ẼP    ∼
                                        ∗  H 6= G.

The characterizing property of ẼP implies that for any G-space Z and any G-CW
complex A, the restriction map
                           [A, ẼP ∧ Z]G → [AG , ẼP ∧ Z]G
is an isomorphism. Since G-acts trivially on AG , the right hand side is isomorphic
to
                                        G
                         [AG , ẼP ∧ Z ] = [AG , Z G ].
Combining these gives the isomorphism
(B.181)                       [A, ẼP ∧ Z]G ≈ [AG , X G ].
This isomorphism is the foundation for our investigation into ΦG .
   Let ι : S → SG be the functor which regards a spectrum as a G-spectrum with
trivial action. As described in §2.5.1, the fixed point functor ( − )G is right adjoint
to ι
                                 ι : S ⇆ SG : ( − )G
and together they form a Quillen morphism in the positive complete model struc-
tures.
   Since smashing with ẼP is homotopical, and the fixed point functor ( − )G is a
right Quillen functor, the functor ΦG is homotopical.
Proposition B.182. For a spectrum X ∈ S, the map
(B.183)                             X → ΦG (ιX)
adjoint to
                           ιX → ẼP ∧ ιX → (ẼP ∧ ιX)f .
is a weak equivalence.


  Proof: We have
                                                               
                         πk ΦG (i∗ X) ≈ ho S(S k , ẼP ∧ X)G
                                                           f
                                                               
                                     ≈ ho S(S k , ẼP ∧ X)G
                                     ≈ ho SG (S k , ẼP ∧ X)
                                            G
                                     ≈ lim πk+W ẼP ∧ XW
                                       −→
                                       W >−k
                                            G
                                     ≈ lim πk+W G XW G
                                       −→
                                       W >−k
200                M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


with the last isomorphism coming from (B.181). Under the composite isomorphism,
the map on stable homotopy groups induced by (B.183) is
                                           G
                        lim πk+V XV → lim πk+W G XW G ,
                        −→            −→
                      V >−k              W >−k
in which V is ranging through the poset of finite dimensional orthogonal vector
spaces and W through the poset of G-representations. This is clearly an isomor-
phism.                                                                       
   Since ẼP is H-equivariantly contractible when H is a proper subgroup of G,
the smash product ẼP ∧ X is contractible if X is a cellular spectrum built entirely
from G-cells induced from a proper subgroup of G. More generally
Lemma B.184. Let A and Y be G-spectra. If X is constructed from A by attaching
G-cells induced from proper subgroups, then the inclusion A → X induces a weak
equivalence
                                       ∼
                          ẼP ∧ A ∧ Y −→ ẼP ∧ X ∧ Y
hence a weak equivalence
                                     ∼ G            
                           ΦG A ∧ Y −  →Φ X ∧Y .
                                                                                  
Corollary B.185. Let V be a G-representation and A a G-CW complex. The
maps
                          G           G
                      S −V ∧ AG → S −V ∧ A ← S −V ∧ A
induce weak equivalences
          G                 G     ∼ G −V G        ∼ G −V      
      S −V ∧ AG ∼ ΦG S −V ∧ AG −    →Φ S      ∧A ←  −Φ S    ∧A ,
giving a zig-zag of weak equivalences
                                      ∼ −V G
                          ΦG S −V ∧ A ←→S     ∧ AG .

                                                                         G
  Proof: We work our way from the left. The weak equivalence S −V ∧ AG ≈
             G
Φ (AG ∧ S −V ) is Proposition B.182. The next map is a weak equivalence by
 G

Lemma B.184 since A is constructed from AG by adding induced G-cells. The last
map can be constructed by applying ΦG to the composition
                                             G                G
                  S −V ∧ A → S −V ∧ S V −V       ∧ A → S −V       ∧ A.
                                                 V −V G
The right arrow is a weak equivalence. Since S         is a G-CW complex with fixed
point space S 0 , it is constructed from S 0 by adding induced G-cells. The left map
therefore induces an equivalence of geometric fixed points by Lemma B.184.         

B.10.2. Motivation and definition of the monoidal geometric fixed point functor.
For an orthogonal representation V of G let V G ⊂ V be the space of invariant
vectors, and V ⊥ the orthogonal complement of V G . Note that
(B.186)            JG (V, W )G ≈ J (V G , W G ) ∧ O(V ⊥ , W ⊥ )G
                                                               +,
so that there is a canonical map
                          JG (V, W )G → J (V G , W G ),
given in terms of (B.186) by smashing the identity map with the map O(V ⊥ , W ⊥ )G →
pt.
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                               201


  We wish to define a functor ΦG
                               M with the property that
                                                   G
                                 −V
(B.187)                    ΦG
                            M (S    ∧ A) = S −V        ∧ AG
and which commutes with colimits as far as is possible. A value needs to be assigned
to the effect of ΦG
                  M on the map

                            S −W ∧ JG (V, W ) → S −V .
The only obvious choice is to take
                             −W                       −V
                       ΦG
                        M (S    ∧ JG (V, W )) → ΦG
                                                 M (S    )
to be the composite
                      G                        G                         G
(B.188)          S −W ∧ JG (V, W )G → S −W ∧ J (V G , W G ) → S −V .
   If ΦGM actually were to commute with colimits, it would be determined by the
specifications given by (B.187) and (B.188). Indeed, using the tautological presenta-
tion to write a general equivariant orthogonal spectrum X as a reflexive coequalizer
                 _                               _
                     S −W ∧ JG (V, W ) ∧ XV ⇒       S −V ∧ XV → X,
               V,W                                 V

the value of ΦG
              M (X) would be given by the reflexive coequalizer diagram
                _      G                         _      G
(B.189)           S −W ∧ JG (V, W )G        G
                                     + ∧ XV ⇒       S −V ∧ XVG → ΦG   M X.
               V,W                                     V

We take this as the definition of ΦG
                                   M (X).

Definition B.190. The monoidal geometric fixed point functor
                                     ΦG   G
                                      M :S →S

is the functor defined by the coequalizer diagram (B.189).
Remark B.191. In case X = S −V ∧ A, the tautological presentation is a split
coequalizer, and one recovers both (B.187) and (B.188).
  A fundamental property of the usual geometric fixed point functor ΦG is that for
proper H ⊂ G, the spectrum ΦG (G+ ∧ X) is contractible. The monoidal geometric
                                      H
fixed point functor has this property on the nose.
Proposition B.192. Suppose that J is a G-set and X an equivariant J-diagram.
If J has no G-fixed points then the map
                                     _
                                 ΦG
                                  M     Xj ) → ∗
                                      j∈J

is an isomorphism. In particular, if H ⊂ G is a proper subgroup and X an orthog-
onal H-spectrum, then the map
                                 ΦG
                                  M (G+ ∧ X) → ∗
                                          H

is an isomorphism.
202                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Proof: Since indexed wedges are computed componentwise, the assumption that
J has no fixed points implies that for all representations W of G,
                          _      G       _         G
                              Xj W =         (Xj )W    = ∗.
                           j∈J            j∈J

The claim then follows from the definition of ΦG
                                               M.                                   
  Working through an equivariant cell decomposition gives
Corollary B.193. Let A and Y be G-spectra. If X is constructed from A by attach-
ing G-cells induced from proper subgroups, then the map ΦG             G
                                                         M (A ∧ Y ) → ΦM (X ∧ Y )
is an isomorphism.                                                             
  There is a natural map
(B.194)                             X G → ΦG
                                           MX
from the fixed point spectrum of X to the monoidal geometric fixed point spectrum.
To construct it note that the fixed point spectrum of X is computed termwise, and
so is given by the coequalizer diagram
                  _                                  _
(B.195)                S −W ∧ J (V, W )+ ∧ XVG ⇒         S −V ∧ XVG → X G .
               V,W ∈J                                V ∈J

The map (B.194) is given by the evident inclusion of (B.195) into (B.189).
   The functor ΦGM cannot commute with all colimits. However, since colimits
of orthogonal G-spectra are computed objectwise, the definition implies that ΦGM
commutes with whatever enriched colimits are preserved by the fixed point functor
on G-spaces. This means that there is a functorial isomorphism
(B.196)                     ΦG            G
                             M (X ∧ A) ≈ ΦM (X) ∧ A
                                                   G

for each pointed G-space A, and that ΦG M commutes with the formation of wedges,
directed colimits and cobase change along a closed inclusion. Because h-cofibrations
and cofibrations are objectwise closed inclusion (Lemma A.70 and Remark 5.38),
the functor ΦGM has good homotopy theoretic properties.

B.10.3. Homotopy properties of ΦG
                                M . Several variations on the following appear in
in [53, §V.4].
Proposition B.197. The functor ΦG     M sends cofibrations to cofibrations and acyclic
cofibrations to acyclic cofibrations. It therefore sends weak equivalences between
cofibrant objects to weak equivalences.

   Proof: That ΦG M sends cofibrations to cofibrations follows from the fact that it
preserves cobase change along closed inclusions and sends generating cofibrations
to generating cofibrations. A similar argument applies to the acyclic cofibrations,
once one checks that ΦG M sends both maps in the factorization (B.67)

                           S −V ⊕W ∧ S W → S̃ −V → S −V
to weak equivalences. But the second map is a homotopy equivalence and the
composite map is sent to a weak equivalence by (B.187). The last assertion is a
consequence of Ken Brown’s Lemma.                                            
   Proposition B.197 implies that the monoidal geometric fixed point functor has
a left derived functor which can be computed on any cofibrant approximation. A
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                             203


similar argument with a slightly different model structure could be used to show
that the left derived functor can be computed on a cellular approximation. We
will show in §B.10.5 that the left derived functor LΦG
                                                     M is the geometric fixed point
functor ΦG .

B.10.4. Monoidal geometric fixed points and smash product. The properties (B.187)
and (B.188) give an identification
                −V
          ΦG
           M (S    ∧ A ∧ S −W ∧ B) ≈ ΦG
                                      M (S
                                           −V
                                              ∧ A) ∧ ΦG
                                                      M (S
                                                           −W
                                                              ∧ B)
making the diagram
      −V1                          −V2                      / ΦG (S −W1 ) ∧ ΦG (S −W2 )
ΦG
 M (S     ∧ JG (W1 , V1 )) ∧ ΦG
                              M (S     ∧ JG (W2 , V2 ))       M             M


                                                                         
         −V1
   ΦG
    M (S     ∧ JG (W1 , V1 ) ∧ S −V2 ∧ JG (W2 , V2 ))          / ΦG (S −W1 ∧ S −W2 )
                                                                  M

commute. Applying ΦG  M termwise to the smash product of the tautological presen-
tations of X and Y , and using the above identifications, gives a natural transfor-
mation
(B.198)                  ΦG        G         G
                          M (X) ∧ ΦM (Y ) → ΦM (X ∧ Y ),

making ΦG M lax monoidal. From the formula (B.187) this map is an isomorphism
if X = S −V ∧ A and Y = S −W ∧ B. This leads to
Proposition B.199 ([53], Proposition V.4.7). The functor ΦG
                                                          M is weakly monoidal:
the map (B.198) is a weak equivalence (in fact an isomorphism) if X and Y are
cellular.


  Proof: The class of spectra X and Y for which (B.198) is an isomorphism is stable
under smashing with a G-space, the formation of wedges, directed colimits, and
cobase change along an objectwise closed inclusion. Since (B.198) is an isomorphism
when X = G+ ∧ S −V ∧ A and Y = G+ ∧ S −W ∧ B this implies it is an isomorphism
              H                        H
when X and Y are cellular. Since isomorphisms are weak equivalences, the result
follows.                                                                     

Remark B.200. Blumberg and Mandell [10, Appendix A] have shown that Propo-
sition B.199 remains true under the assumption that only one of X or Y is cellular.
This implies that Proposition B.203 below remains true if only one of N or N ′ is
cofibrant.
B.10.5. Relation with the geometric fixed point functor. We now turn to identifying
the left derived functor LΦG                                               G
                             M with the geometric fixed point functor Φ . The
           0
inclusion S → ẼP and the fibrant replacement functor give maps
                           X → ẼP ∧ X → (ẼP ∧ X)f .
Proposition B.201 ([53], Proposition V.4.17). If X is cofibrant, then the maps
               ΦG X = (ẼP ∧ Xf )G → ΦG                  G
                                      M ((ẼP ∧ X)f ) ← ΦM (X)

are weak equivalences.
204                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


   Sketch of proof: For the arrow on the left, note that both functors are homo-
topical and, up to weak equivalence, preserve filtered colimits along h-cofibrations.
Using the canonical homotopy presentation, it suffices to check that the arrow on
the left is a weak equivalence when X = S −V ∧ A, with A a G-CW complex. This
follows from Corollary B.185, the identity (B.187), and a little diagram chasing to
check compatibility.
   The right arrow is the composition of
                             ΦG        G
                              M (X) → ΦM (ẼP ∧ X)
which is an isomorphism by (B.196), and
                        ΦG              G
                         M (ẼP ∧ X) → ΦM ((ẼP ∧ X)f ),
which is an acyclic cofibration by Proposition B.197.                              

B.10.6. The relative monoidal geometric fixed point functor. The functor ΦG M can
be formulated relative to an equivariant commutative or associative algebra R. As
described below, care must be taken in using the theory in this way.
   Because it is lax monoidal, the functor ΦG
                                            M gives a functor

                                ΦG
                                 M : MR → MΦG
                                            MR

which is lax monoidal in case R is commutative.
Proposition B.202. The functor
                                ΦG
                                 M : MR → MΦG
                                            MR

commutes with cobase change along a cofibration and preserves the classes of cofi-
brations and acyclic cofibrations.

  Proof: This follows easily from the fact that the maps of equivariant orthogonal
spectra underlying the generating cofibrations for MR are h-cofibrations.       

Proposition B.203. When R is commutative, the functor
                                ΦG
                                 M : MR → MΦG
                                            MR

is weakly monoidal, and in fact
                           ′                            ′
(B.204)               ΦG
                       M (N )     ∧      ΦG         G
                                          M (N ) → ΦM (N ∧ N )
                                ΦG
                                 M (R)
                                                         R
                        ′
is an isomorphism if N and N are cofibrant.                                        

   Proof: The proof is the same as that of Proposition B.199 once one knows that
the class of modules N ′ and N for which (B.204) is an isomorphism is stable under
cobase change along a generating cofibration. This, in turn, is a consequence of
the fact that both sides of (B.204) preserve h-cofibrations in each variable, since
h-cofibrations are closed inclusions. The functor ΦG M does so since it commutes
with the formation of mapping cylinders, and N ′ ∧ ( − ) does since MR is a closed
                                                    R
symmetric monoidal category.                                                       
   As promising as it looks, it is not so easy to make use of Proposition B.203. The
trouble is that unless X is cofibrant, ΦGM (X) may not have the weak homotopy type
of ΦG (X). So in order to use Proposition B.203 one needs a condition guaranteeing
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 205


that N ′ ∧ N is a cofibrant spectrum. The criterion of Proposition B.205 below was
          R
suggested to us by Mike Mandell.

Proposition B.205. Suppose R is an associative algebra with the property that
S −1 ∧ R is cofibrant. If N ′ is a cofibrant right R-module, and S −1 ∧ N is a cofibrant
left R-module, then
                                        N′ ∧ N
                                             R

is cofibrant.


   Proof: First note that the condition on R guarantees that for every representa-
tion U with dim U G > 0 and every cofibrant G-space T , the spectrum

(B.206)                              S −U ∧ R ∧ T

is cofibrant. Since the formation of N ′ ∧ N commutes with cobase change in both
                                         R
variables, the result reduces to the case N ′ = S −V ∧ R ∧ X and N = S −W ∧ R ∧ Y
with V having a non-zero fixed point space, and X and Y cofibrant G-spaces. But
in that case
                           N ′ ∧ N ≈ S −V ⊕W ∧ R ∧ X ∧ Y
                              R

which is of the form (B.206), and hence cofibrant.                                    

Corollary B.207. Suppose R is an associative algebra with the property that S −1 ∧
R is cofibrant. If N ′ is a cofibrant right R-module, then the equivariant orthogonal
spectrum underlying N ′ is cofibrant.


   Proof: Just take N = R in Proposition B.205.                                       

   The following result plays an important role in determining ΦG R(∞) (§7.3).

Proposition B.208. Suppose that R is an equivariant associative algebra whose
underlying G-spectrum is cellular, and that R → S 0 is an equivariant associative
algebra map. If N ′ is a cofibrant right R-module, then N ′ ∧ S 0 is a cofibrant
                                                                   R
spectrum, and the map
                               ′             ′
                          ΦG         0   G       0
                           M (N ) ∧ S → ΦM (N ∧ S )
                                   ΦG
                                    MR
                                                       R

is an isomorphism.


   Proof: One easily reduces to the case N ′ = S −V ∧ X ∧ R, in which V is a
representation with V G 6= 0, and X is a cofibrant G-space. In this case N ′ ∧ S 0 is
                                                                                R
isomorphic to S −V ∧ X which is cofibrant. The assertion about monoidal geometric
fixed points follows easily from Proposition B.199.                            
206                   M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


B.11. Geometric fixed points and the norm. Our original version of the fol-
lowing result merely concluded that the transformation in question was a weak
equivalence on cofibrant objects. Andrew Blumberg and Mike Mandell pointed out
that it is in fact an isomorphism. At their request we have included the stronger
statement.
Proposition B.209. Suppose H ⊂ G. There is a natural transformation
                               ΦH          G     G
                                M ( − ) → ΦM ◦ N H ( − )

which is an isomorphism, hence a weak equivalence on cellular objects.

   Proof: To construct the natural transformation, first note that there is a natural
isomorphism
                                 AH ≈ (NH  G
                                             A)G
for H-equivariant spaces A. Next note that for an orthogonal representation V of
H, Proposition A.59 and the property (B.187) give isomorphisms
                                             G             H
                     G −V       − indH V
                 ΦG
                  M NH S  ≈ ΦG
                             MS          ≈ S −V                ≈ ΦH S −V .
The monoidal properties of ΦG
                            M and the norm then combine to give an isomorphism

(B.210)                   ΦH (S −V ∧ A) ≈ ΦG NH
                                              G
                                                (S −V ∧ A)
which one easily checks to be compatible with the maps
                              S −V ∧ JH (W, V ) → S −W .
To construct the transformation, write a general H-spectrum X in terms of its
tautological presentation
                _                            _
                    S −W ∧ JH (V, W ) ∧ XV ⇒    S −V ∧ XV → X,
                V,W                                   V

and apply (B.210) termwise to produce a diagram
         _       H                         _      H
            S −W ∧ JH (V, W )H ∧ XVH ⇒        S −V ∧ XVH → ΦG NH
                                                               G
                                                                 X.
          V,W                                    V

The coequalizer of the two arrows is, by definition, ΦH  M (X). This gives the natural
transformation.
   The isomorphism assertion for cellular X reduces to the special case (B.210),
once one show that ΦG           G
                        M ◦ NH ( − ) commute with the formation of wedges, cobase
change along cofibrations between cofibrant objects, and filtered colimits along
closed inclusions. The last property is clear since both of the functors being com-
posed commutes with filtered colimits along closed inclusions. For the other two
assertions it will be easier to work in terms of equivariant J-diagrams for J = G/H.
   Suppose that T is an indexing set, and Xt , t ∈ T a set of equivariant J-diagrams.
We wish to show that the natural map
                              _                    _     ∧J
                                       ∧J
(B.211)                           ΦG
                                   M Xt   → ΦGM       Xt
                            t∈T                      t∈T

is an isomorphism. For this use the distributive law to rewrite the argument of the
right hand side as                    _
                                          X ∧γ
                                       γ∈Γ
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                       207


where γ is the G-set of functions J → T and
                                        ^
                                 X ∧γ =   Xγ(j) .
                                                j∈J

The map asserted to be an isomorphism on monoidal geometric fixed points is the
inclusion of the summand indexed by the constant functions. But since G acts
trivially on T , the other summands form an indexed wedge over a G-set with no
fixed points. The claim then follows from Proposition B.192.
   The cobase change property is similar. Suppose we are given a pushout square
of equivariant J-diagrams
                                    A      /B

                                               
                                    X        /Y
in which A → B is a cofibration and A is cofibrant. We consider the filtration of
Y ∧J given in §A.3.4 whose stages fit into a pushout square
                  _                               _
                       X ∧J0 ∧ ∂A B ∧J1       /        X ∧J0 ∧ B ∧J1
               J=J0 ∐J1                                 J=J0 ∐J1
                |J1 |=m                                  |J1 |=m

                                                                     
                        film−1 Y ∧J                            / film Y ∧J .

By Proposition B.97, the upper arrow is an h-cofibration, so the resulting diagram
of monoidal geometric fixed points is a pushout. But since J is a transitive G-set,
unless m = |J| the group G has no fixed points on the G-set indexing the wedges.
Applying Proposition B.192 then shows that for m < |J| the map
                                        ∧J             ∧J
                                    ΦG
                                     MX    → ΦG
                                              M film Y

is an isomorphism, and that the pushout square when m = |J| becomes
                                         ∧J            / ΦG B ∧J
                                 ΦG
                                  M ∂A B                  M


                                                           
                                         ∧J            / ΦG Y ∧J .
                                    ΦG
                                     M X                  M
                          ∧J
However the term ∂A B  is the term fil|J|−1 B ∧J in the case in which X = A
                   G ∧J             ∧J
and Y = B, and so ΦM A → ΦG  M ∂A B     is an isomorphism. This completes the
proof.                                                                     
   Thinking in terms of left derived functors one can get a slightly better result. As
                                                G         G
long as X has the property that the map (LNH      )X → NH   X is a weak equivalence,
there will be a weak equivalence between ΦH X and ΦG NH       G
                                                                X. Since it plays an
                                                                H
important role in our work, we spell it out. Start with X ∈ S and let Xc → X be
a cofibrant approximation. Now consider the diagram
                                ∼               ∼                      ∼
(B.212)            ΦH X c o          / ΦH X c
                                        M
                                                      / ΦG N G X c o
                                                        M     H
                                                                               / ΦG N G X c
                                                                                     H
                              zig zag                                zig zag

                    ∼
                                                                                   
                   ΦH X                                                         ΦG N HG
                                                                                        X
208                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


The left vertical arrows are weak equivalences since the geometric fixed point functor
preserves weak equivalences. The weak equivalences in the top row are given by
Propositions B.201, B.89, and B.209. Since ΦG is homotopical we have
Proposition B.213. Suppose that X ∈ SH has the property that for some (hence
any) cofibrant approximation Xc → X the map
                                    G       G
                                   NH Xc → NH X
is a weak equivalence. Then the functorial relationship between ΦH X and ΦG NH
                                                                             G
                                                                               X
given by (B.212) is a weak equivalence.                                        
Remark B.214. Proposition B.213 can be proved without reference to ΦG
                                                                    M by using
the canonical homotopy presentation.
Remark B.215. Proposition B.213 applies in particular when X is very flat in the
sense of §B.8.2. By Proposition B.147 this means that if R ∈ SH is a cofibrant
commutative ring, then ΦH R and ΦG NH    G
                                           R are related by a functorial zig-zag of
weak equivalences. The case of interest to us is when H = C2 , G = C2n and
                         G
R = M UR . In this case NH R = M U ((G)), and we get an equivalence
                          ΦG M U ((G)) ≈ ΦC2 M UR ≈ M O.
Remark B.216. Proposition B.213 also applies to the suspension spectra of cofibrant
H-spaces. Indeed, if X is a cofibrant H-space then S −1 ∧ S 1 ∧ X → X is a cofibrant
                             G
approximation. Applying NH      leads to the map
                          S −V ∧ S V ∧ NH
                                        G        G
                                          (X) → NH (X)
with V = indGH R, which is a weak equivalence (in fact a cofibrant approximation).
This case is used to show that ΦG ◦ NHG
                                         is a ring homomorphism on the RO(G)-
graded cohomology of G-spaces (Proposition 2.59).
B.12. Real bordism. In this section we give a construction of the real bordism
spectrum M UR as a commutative algebra in SC2 . As will be apparent to the
reader, this construction owes a great deal to the Stefan Schwede’s construction
of M U in [74, Chapter 2]. We are indebted to Schwede for some very helpful
correspondence concerning these matters.
   Our goal is to construct a C2 -equivariant commutative ring M UR admitting the
canonical homotopy presentation
                                                 n
(B.217)                  M UR ≈ holim S −C ∧ M U (n),
                                   −→
in which M U (n) is the Thom complex of the universal bundle over BU (n). The
group C2 is acting on everything by complex conjugation, so we could also write
this expression as
(B.218)                    M UR ≈ holim S −nρ2 ∧ M U (n).
                                    −→
The map
                                S −ρ2 ∧ M U (1) → M UR
defines a real orientation. These things form the basis for everything we proved
about M UR .
   The most natural construction of M UR realizes this structure in the category SR
of real spectra, which is related to the category of C2 -equivariant orthogonal spectra
by a multiplicative Quillen equivalence
                                  i ! : SR ⇆ SC 2 : i ∗ .
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 209


We will construct a commutative algebra MU R ∈ comm SR , whose underlying real
spectrum has a canonical homotopy presentation of the form
                        ∼                          ∼
(B.219)        MU R ← − holim S −nC ∧ M U (n) −
                                              → holim S −nC ∧ M U (n)cf .
                          −→                       −→
Applying i! to (B.219) and making the identification i! S −C = S −ρ2 leads to the
diagram
(B.220)           i! MU R ← holim S −nρ2 ∧ M U (n) → holim S −nρ2 ∧ M U (n)cf .
                               −→                       −→
We define M UR to be the spectrum i! MU ′R , where MU ′R → MU R is a cofibrant
commutative algebra approximation. The functor i! is strictly monoidal, so M UR is
a commutative ring in SC2 . The map on the right in (B.220) is a weak equivalence
since i! is a left Quillen functor. The problem is to show that the one on the left is.
   This involves two steps. The first is to show that the forgetful functor
                                   comm SR → SR
creates a model category structure on comm SR . This involves analyzing the sym-
metric powers of cofibrant real spectra, which, as pointed out in Remark B.120
depends in an essential way on understanding the homotopy theoretic properties
of indexed symmetric powers. The second is to show that the functor i! is ho-
motopical on a subcategory of SR containing the real spectra underlying cofibrant
real commutative rings. As in our analysis of norms of commutative rings, this
involves a generalized notion of flatness. There is no real way to short circuit the
model structure on comm SR . Its role is to identify the cofibrant real commutative
algebras. But the only real work in establishing the model structure is showing
that what one thinks is a cofibrant approximation is actually a weak equivalence,
and that is what is needed to show that every real commutative algebra is weakly
equivalent to a cofibrant one.

B.12.1. Real and complex spectra. In this section we describe the basics of real and
complex spectra. The additive results are more or less all a special case of the results
of [54], but the important multiplicative properties require a separate analysis.
   For finite dimensional complex Hermitian vector spaces A and B let U (A, B) be
the Stiefel manifold of unitary embeddings A ֒→ B. There is a natural Hermitian
inner product on the complexification VC of a real orthogonal vector space V , so
there is a natural map
                              O(V, W ) → U (VC , WC ).
The group C2 acts on U (VC , WC ) by complex conjugation, and the fixed point space
is O(V, W ).
Definition B.221. The category JC is the topological category whose objects are
finite dimensional Hermitian vector spaces, and whose morphism space JC (A, B)
is the Thom complex
                        JC (A, B) = Thom(U (A, B); B − A).
The category JR is the C2 -equivariant topological category whose objects are finite
dimensional orthogonal real vector spaces V , and with
                             JR (V, W ) = JC (VC , WC ),
on which C2 acts by complex conjugation.
210                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


Definition B.222. The category SC of complex spectra is the topological category
of (continuous) functors
                                JC → T .
The category SR of real spectra is the topological category of C2 -enriched functors
                                     JR → T C2 ,
and equivariant natural transformations.
  We will write
                                      V 7→ XVC
for a typical real spectrum X, and let S −VC ∈ SR be the functor co-represented by
V ∈ JR . From the Yoneda lemma there is a natural isomorphism
                                SR (S −VC , X) = XVC .
As with equivariant orthogonal spectra, every real spectrum X has a tautological
presentation
                _                                    _
(B.223)               S −WC ∧ JR (V, W ) ∧ XWC ⇒         S −VC ∧ XVC → X.
               V,W ∈JR                                   V ∈JR

A similar apparatus exist for complex spectra.
Remark B.224. The category JR is equivalent to its full subcategory with objects
Rn , and similarly JC is equivalent to its full subcategory with objects Cn . Thus
a real spectrum X is specified by the spaces XVC with V = Rn together with the
structure maps between them, and an object Y ∈ SC is specified by its spaces YCn ,
together with the structure maps between them.
  The group C2 acts on SC through its action on JC . We write this as X 7→ X̄,
where
                               (X̄)V = XV̄ .
A fixed point for this action is a complex spectrum X equipped with an isomor-
phism X → X̄ having the property that X → X̄ → X̄         ¯ = X is the identity map.
Restricting to the spaces XCn and using the standard basis to identify Cn with C̄n
one sees that a fixed point for this C2 -action consists of a sequence C2 -spaces XCn ,
together with an associative family C2 -equivariant maps
                         JC (Cn , Cm ) ∧U(Cn ) XCn → XCm ,
where C2 is acting by conjugation. But this is the same thing as giving a real
spectrum indexed on the spaces Rn . This shows that the category of fixed points
for the C2 -action on SC is SR .
B.12.2. Smash product and indexed smash products. The orthogonal sum makes
JC into a symmetric monoidal category and JR an T C2 -enriched symmetric
monoidal category. Using this one can define the smash product X ∧ Y giving
both SR and SC the structure of symmetric monoidal categories. The smash prod-
uct in SR is specified by the formula
                             S −VC ∧ S −WC = S −(V ⊕W )C
and the fact that it commutes with colimits in each variable. A similar characteri-
zation holds for SC .
                             KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                211


   There are indexed monoidal products in this context. Let J be a finite set with
a C2 -action. The actions of C2 on J and on SC combine to give an action on the
product category SJC . The category of SJR of real J-diagrams is the category of fixed
points for this action. The category of real J-diagrams for J = {pt} is equivalent
to SR . When J = C2 , the category of real J-diagrams is equivalent to SC . For
general J = n1 + n2 C2 , one has an equivalence
                                  SJR ≈ SnR1 × SnC2 .
There are indexed wedges and indexed smash products from SJR to SR .

B.12.3. Homotopy theory of real and complex spectra. We now turn to the homo-
topy theory of real and complex spectra. We describe the case of SR and leave the
analogous case of SC to the reader.
   Suppose that X is a real spectrum. For H ⊂ C2 and k ∈ Z set
                                             H
                              πkH (X) = lim πk+V  XVC .
                                        −→      C
                                          V

The colimit is taken over the poset of finite dimensional orthogonal vector spaces
over R, ordered (in agreement with Definition 2.3) by dimension. A stable weak
equivalence in SR is a map X → Y inducing an isomorphism πkH X → πkH Y for all
H ⊂ C2 and k ∈ Z. For fixed k, the groups πkH form a Mackey functor which we
denote π k .
    Equipped with the stable weak equivalences, the category SR becomes a homo-
topical category. We refine it to a model category by defining a map to be a fibration
if for each non-zero V , the map XVC → YVC is a fibration in T C2 . The cofibrations
are the maps having the left lifting property against the acyclic fibrations. This is
the positive stable model structure on SR .
    The positive stable model structure is cofibrantly generated. The generating
cofibrations can be taken to be the maps of the form
                                                          
                                     S −VC ∧ S+n−1
                                                   → D+ n


and
                                                          
                           (C2 )+ ∧ S −VC ∧ S+
                                             n−1    n
                                                 → D+
with V > 0. The generating acyclic cofibrations are the analogous maps
                                            n−1
                                                      
                                  S −VC ∧ I+     → In

and
                                                          
                           (C2 )+ ∧ S −VC ∧ I+
                                             n−1
                                                 → In
together with the corner maps formed by smashing
(B.225)                      S −VC ⊕WC ∧ S WC → S̃ −VC
               n−1     n                 n−1      n
with the maps S+   → D+  and (C2 )+ ∧ (S+     → D+  ). We assume V > 0, while
W need not be. The map (B.225) is extracted from the factorization
                         S −VC ⊕WC ∧ S WC → S̃ −VC → S −VC
formed by applying the small object construction with the generating cofibrations.
As in the case of the complete positive stable model structure on SG , the map
212                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


S̃ −VC → S −VC is a homotopy equivalence. The verification of the model category
axioms is straightforward. See §B.4.1 or [54].
B.12.4. Real spectra and C2 -spectra. Let
                                    i : JR → JC2
be the functor sending V to
                                     Vρ2 = V ⊗ ρ2 .
Then the restriction functor
                                    i ∗ : S C 2 → SR
has both a left and right adjoint which we denote i! and i∗ respectively. The left
adjoint sends S −VC to S −Vρ2 , and is described in general by applying the functor
termwise to the tautological presentation.
   Since the functor i is symmetric monoidal, the left adjoint i! is strongly symmetric
monoidal.
Proposition B.226. The functors
                                   i ! : SR ⇆ SC 2 : i ∗
form a Quillen equivalence.
Remark B.227. A similar discussion leads to a Quillen equivalence
                                        SC ⇆ S.

  Proof: Since i! is a left adjoint and
                               i! (S −VC ∧ A) = S −Vρ2 ∧ A
it is immediate that i! sends the generating (acyclic) cofibrations to (acyclic) cofi-
brations, and hence is a left Quillen functor. Using the fact that the sequence
{Rn ⊗ ρ2 } is exhausting, one can easily check that a map X → Y in SC2 is a weak
equivalence if and only if i∗ X → i∗ Y is. This means that to show that i! and i∗
form a Quillen equivalence it suffices to show that the unit map
(B.228)                               X → i∗ i! X
is a weak equivalence for every cofibrant X ∈ SR . Since i∗ is also a left adjoint, it
preserves colimits, and therefore so does i∗ i! . Since both functors also commute with
smashing with a C2 -space, we are reduced to checking that for each 0 6= V ∈ JR ,
the map
(B.229)                            S −VC → i∗ S −Vρ2
is a weak equivalence.
   For W ∈ JR , the WC -space of S −VC is
                     JR (V, W ) = Thom(U (VC , WC ); WC − VC )
and the W -space of i∗ S −Vρ2 is
                 JC2 (Vρ2 , Wρ2 ) = Thom(O(Vρ2 , Wρ2 ); Wρ2 − Vρ2 ).
The unit of the adjunction is derived from the inclusion U (VC , WC ) → O(Vρ2 , Wρ2 ).
We must therefore show that for each k, the map
(B.230)            lim π k+WC JR (VC , WC ) → lim π k+WC JC2 (Vρ2 , Wρ2 )
                   −→                         −→
                 W ∈JR                             W ∈JR
                              KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 213


is an isomorphism.
   We may suppose that dim W > dim V . For a fixed W choose an orthogonal
embedding V ⊂ W , write W = V ⊕ U , and consider the diagram
                              S UC            / JR (V, W )

                              ≈
                                                    
                              S Uρ2         / JC2 (Vρ2 , Wρ2 ) .

The left vertical map is an equivariant isomorphism. A straightforward argument
using the connectivity of Stiefel manifolds shows that for dim W ≫ 0 the horizontal
                                   u          C2
maps are isomorphisms in both πk+W    C
                                        and πk+W  C
                                                    . It follows that the right vertical
map is as well, and hence so is (B.230).                                              
   For later reference, we record one fact that emerged in the proof of Proposi-
tion B.226.
Lemma B.231. The functor i∗ reflects weak equivalences: a map X → Y ∈ SC2
is a weak equivalence if and only if i∗ X → i∗ Y is.                   
B.12.5. Multiplicative aspects of real spectra. The multiplicative homotopy theory
of real spectra is similar to that of SG . Though there does not seem to be a simple
way to directly deduce the results from the case of SC2 , the proofs are very similar.
Proposition B.232. If J is a set with a C2 -action and X → Y is a cofibration
of cofibrant real J-diagrams, then both the indexed corner map ∂X Y ∧J → Y ∧J and
the absolute map X ∧J → Y ∧J are cofibrations between cofibrant objects. They are
weak equivalences if X → Y is.

  Proof: This is an analogue of Propositions B.96 and B.103, and is proved in the
same way, using the arrow category and the filtration of §A.3.4.               
   For the symmetric powers, we fix a C2 -set J and a C2 -stable subgroup Σ ⊂ ΣI .
The following is an analog of Proposition B.117 and, making use of Proposi-
tion B.232, is proved in the same manner.
Proposition B.233. If X ∈ SR is cofibrant and Z is any real spectrum equipped
with an action of Σ ⋊ C2 extending the G-action, then the map
                      (EC2 Σ)+ ∧ (X ∧J ∧ Z) → (X ∧J ∧ Z)/Σ.
                                  Σ
is a weak equivalence.                                                                
Proposition B.234. If A → B is a cofibration of cofibrant real spectra and J is a
finite set with a C2 -action, then in the diagram
                         EC2 Σ+ ∧ ∂A B ∧J          / EC2 Σ+ ∧ B ∧J
                                  Σ                          Σ


                                                           
                           ∂A SymJ B                   / SymJ B
the upper row is a cofibration between cofibrant objects, the vertical maps are weak
equivalences and remain so after smashing with any object, and the bottom row is an
h-cofibration of flat spectra. The horizontal maps are weak equivalences if A → B
is.
214                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


  Proof: This is an analogue of Proposition B.109 and is proved in the same way,
making use of Proposition B.233.                                              

Proposition B.235. The forgetful functor
                                    comm SR → SR
creates a model category structure on commutative algebras in SR , in which a map of
commutative algebras is a fibration or weak equivalence if and only if the underlying
map of real spectra is.

  Proof: This is proved in the same manner as Proposition B.130, making use of
Proposition B.234.                                                          

B.12.6. Generalized flatness. Our next task is to show that the left derived functor
of i! can be computed on a subcategory of real spectra containing those which
underlie real commutative rings.
Definition B.236. A real spectrum X ∈ SR is i! -flat if it satisfies the following
property: for every cofibrant approximation X̃ → X and every weak equivalence
Z̃ → Z ∈ SC2 the map
(B.237)                          i! X̃ ∧ Z̃ → i! X ∧ Z
is a weak equivalence.
Remark B.238. Since i! is a left Quillen functor and cofibrant objects of SC2 are
flat, cofibrant objects of SR are i! -flat.
Remark B.239. If (B.237) is a weak equivalence for one cofibrant approximation it
is a weak equivalence for any cofibrant approximation.
  Our main result is
Proposition B.240. If R ∈ SR is a cofibrant commutative algebra then R is i! -flat.
   The proof of Proposition B.240 follows the argument for the proof of Proposi-
tion B.147.
Lemma B.241. If A ∈ SR is cofibrant, and n ≥ 1, then Symn A is i! -flat.

  Proof: By Proposition B.233, the map
                           (EC2 Σn )+ ∧ A∧n → Symn A
                                       Σn

is a cofibrant approximation. Since i! is a continuous left adjoint, we may identify
                                                            
(B.242)            i! (EC2 Σn )+ ∧ A∧n ∧ Z̃ → i! Symn A ∧ Z
                                 Σn

with
(B.243)            (EC2 Σn )+ ∧ (i! A)∧n ∧ Z̃ → Symn (i! A) ∧ Z.
                               Σn

Since i! is a left Quillen functor, i! (A) is cofibrant, and Proposition B.117 implies
that (B.243), hence (B.242) is a weak equivalence.                                  
   We also require an analogue of Lemma B.164, though the statement and proof
are much simpler in this case, since i! is a left adjoint.
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                 215


Lemma B.244. If S → T is an h-cofibration in SR , and two of S, T , T /S are
i! -flat, then so is the third.


   Proof: We may choose a map S̃ → T̃ of cofibrant approximations which is a
cofibration, hence an h-cofibration. Our assumption is that two of the vertical
maps in
                     i! S̃ ∧ Z̃   / i! T̃ ∧ Z̃ / i! (T̃ /S̃) ∧ Z̃


                                                                              
                      i! S ∧ Z          / i! T ∧ Z                    / i! (T /S) ∧ Z

are weak equivalences. This implies that the third is, since the two left horizontal
maps are h-cofibrations hence flat.                                               

Lemma B.245. Consider a pushout square in SR ,
(B.246)                                     S            /T

                                                          
                                            X            /Y

in which S → T is an h-cofibration. If T , T /S and X are i! -flat, then so is Y .


   Proof: Since T and T /S are i! -flat, so is S by Lemma B.244. We may choose
cofibrant approximations of everything fitting into a pushout diagram

                                            S̃           / T̃

                                                           
                                            X̃           / Ỹ
in which the top row is an h-cofibration. Now consider

                        i! X̃ ∧ Z̃ o             i! S̃ ∧ Z̃             / i! T̃ ∧ Z̃


                                                                             
                        i! X ∧ Z o               i! S ∧ Z               / i! T ∧ Z

The left horizontal maps are h-cofibrations, hence flat, and the vertical maps are
weak equivalences by assumption. It follows that the map of pushouts is a weak
equivalence.                                                                    


   Proof of Proposition B.240: It suffices to show that if A → B is a generating
cofibration in SR then
                              Sym A         / Sym B


                                                                 
                                       X                        /Y
216                 M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


is a pushout square of commutative algebras in SR and X is i! -flat, then Y is i! -flat.
We induct over the filtration described in §A.3.4. Since fil0 Y = X, the induction
starts. For the inductive step, consider the pushout square
(B.247)                   X ∧ ∂A Symm B             / X ∧ Symm B


                                                                  
                             film−1 Y                        / film Y ,

and assume that film−1 Y is i! -flat. Both Symm B and
                          Symm B/∂A Symm B = Symm (B/A)
are i! -flat by Lemma B.241. Since smash products of i! -flat spectra are i! -flat,
both X ∧ Symm B and X ∧ Symm (B/A) are i! -flat. The top row of (B.247) is an
h-cofibration, so Lemma B.245 implies that film Y is i! -flat. This completes the
inductive step, and the proof.                                                   
    Though we don’t quite need the following result, having come this far we record
it for future reference.
Proposition B.248. The functors i! and i∗ restrict to a Quillen equivalence
                           i! : comm SR ⇆ comm SC2 : i∗ .


  Proof: It is immediate from the definition of the model structures on comm SR
and comm SC2 , and the fact that
                                   i ! : SR ⇆ SC 2 : i ∗
is a Quillen pair, that
                             i∗ : comm SC2 → comm SR
preserves the classes of fibrations and acyclic fibrations. It remains to show that if
A ∈ comm SR is cofibrant, then the composition
                                A → i∗ i! A → i∗ (i! Af )
is a weak equivalence, where i! A → i! Af is a fibrant replacement. Since i∗ reflects
weak equivalences (Lemma B.231) this is equivalent to showing that
                                        A → i∗ i! A
is a weak equivalence. Let A′ → A be a cofibrant approximation in SR , and consider
the following diagram in SR
                                            ∼
(B.249)                             A′          / i∗ i! A′

                                   ∼                  ∼
                                                     
                                     A          / i∗ i! A .

By Proposition B.240 the map i! A′ → i! A is a weak equivalence. The rightmost
arrow in (B.249) is therefore a weak equivalence. The top arrow is a weak equiva-
lence by Proposition B.226, and the left arrow is a weak equivalence by assumption.
This implies that the bottom arrow is a weak equivalence.                        
                                KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                       217


B.12.7. The real bordism spectrum. For V ∈ JR let
                             M U (VC ) = Thom(BU (VC ), VC )
be the Thom complex of the bundle EU (VC ) × VC over BU (VC ), equipped with
                                                    U(VC )
the C2 -action of complex conjugation. We will take our model of BU (VC ) to be the
one given by Segal’s construction [77], so that
(B.250)                          V 7→ Thom(BU (VC ), VC )
is a lax symmetric monoidal functor JR → T C2 , and so defines a commutative ring
MU R ∈ comm SR . Let MU ′R → MU R be a cofibrant approximation to MU R in
comm SR .
Definition B.251. The real bordism spectrum is the spectrum M UR = i! MU ′R .
   To get at the homotopy type of M UR , we examine the canonical homotopy
presentation of MU R using the exhausting sequence Vn = Rn . This gives a weak
equivalence
                                         n              ∼
(B.252)                  holim S −C ∧ M U (n) −→ MU ′R
                            −→
in which M U (n) = M U (Cn ). Applying i! and using Proposition B.240 gives
                                                        ∼
                          holim S −nρ2 ∧ M U (n) −→ M UR .
                            −→
In this presentation the universal real orientation of M UR (Example 5.5) is given
by restricting to the term n = 1
                                 S −ρ2 ∧ M U (1) → M UR .
  The next result summarizes some further consequences of the presentation (B.252).
Proposition B.253. i) The non-equivariant spectrum underlying M UR is the
usual complex cobordism spectrum M U .
  ii) The equivariant cohomology theory represented by M UR coincides with the one
studied in [43, 24, 6, 35].
iii) There is an equivalence
                                     ΦC2 M UR ≈ M O.
 iv) The Schubert cell decomposition of Grassmannians leads to a cofibrant approx-
imation of M UR by a C2 -CW complex with one 0-cell (S 0 ) and the remaining cells
of the form emρ2 , with m > 0.

                                       References
[1] J. Adámek, J. Rosický, and E. M. Vitale, What are sifted colimits?, Theory Appl. Categ. 23
    (2010), No. 13, 251–260. MR 2720191 (2011g:18002)
[2]        , Algebraic theories, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics, vol. 184, Cambridge Univer-
    sity Press, Cambridge, 2011, A categorical introduction to general algebra, With a foreword
    by F. W. Lawvere. MR 2757312 (2012f:18001)
[3] J. F. Adams, On the non-existence of elements of Hopf invariant one, Ann. of Math. (2) 72
    (1960), 20–104. MR MR0141119 (25 #4530)
[4] J. F. Adams, Stable homotopy and generalised homology, University of Chicago Press,
    Chicago, 1974.
[5] J. F. Adams, Prerequisites (on equivariant stable homotopy) for Carlsson’s lecture, Algebraic
    topology, Aarhus 1982 (Aarhus, 1982), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1051, Springer, Berlin,
    1984, pp. 483–532. MR 764596 (86f:57037)
218                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


 [6] Shôrô Araki, Orientations in τ -cohomology theories, Japan. J. Math. (N.S.) 5 (1979), no. 2,
     403–430. MR MR614829 (83a:55010)
 [7] M. F. Atiyah, K-theory and reality, Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. (2) 17 (1966), 367–386.
     MR 34 #6756
 [8] M. G. Barratt, J. D. S. Jones, and M. E. Mahowald, The Kervaire invariant problem, Proceed-
     ings of the Northwestern Homotopy Theory Conference (Providence, Rhode Island) (H. R.
     Miller and S. B. Priddy, eds.), Contemporary Mathematics, vol. 19, American Mathematical
     Society, 1983, pp. 9–22.
 [9]         , Relations amongst Toda brackets and the Kervaire invariant in dimension 62,
     Journal of the London Mathematical Society 30 (1985), 533–550.
[10] Andrew J. Blumberg and Michael A. Mandell, The homotopy theory of cyclotomic spectra,
     arXiv:1303.1694v2.
[11] Anna Marie Bohmann, A comparison of norm maps, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 142 (2014),
     no. 4, 1413–1423, With an appendix by Bohmann and Emily Riehl. MR 3162261
[12] Francis Borceux, Handbook of categorical algebra. 2, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its
     Applications, vol. 51, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994, Categories and struc-
     tures. MR 1313497 (96g:18001b)
[13] W. Browder, The Kervaire invariant of framed manifolds and its generalization, Annals of
     Mathematics 90 (1969), 157–186.
[14] Gunnar Carlsson, Equivariant stable homotopy and Segal’s Burnside ring conjecture, Ann.
     of Math. (2) 120 (1984), no. 2, 189–224. MR 763905 (86f:57036)
[15] A. H. Clifford and G. B. Preston, The algebraic theory of semigroups. Vol. I, Mathematical
     Surveys, No. 7, American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I., 1961. MR MR0132791 (24
     #A2627)
[16] Ethan S. Devinatz and Michael J. Hopkins, Homotopy fixed point spectra for closed subgroups
     of the Morava stabilizer groups, Topology 43 (2004), no. 1, 1–47. MR 2 030 586
[17] Ethan S. Devinatz, Michael J. Hopkins, and Jeffrey H. Smith, Nilpotence and stable homotopy
     theory. I, Ann. of Math. (2) 128 (1988), no. 2, 207–241. MR 89m:55009
[18] Andreas W. M. Dress, Contributions to the theory of induced representations, Algebraic
     K-theory, II: “Classical” algebraic K-theory and connections with arithmetic (Proc. Conf.,
     Battelle Memorial Inst., Seattle, Wash., 1972), Springer, Berlin, 1973, pp. 183–240. Lecture
     Notes in Math., Vol. 342. MR MR0384917 (52 #5787)
[19] E. Dror Farjoun, Cellular inequalities, The Čech centennial (Boston, MA, 1993), Contemp.
     Math., vol. 181, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1995, pp. 159–181. MR MR1320991
     (96g:55011)
[20] Daniel Dugger, An Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence for KR-theory, K-Theory 35 (2005),
     no. 3-4, 213–256 (2006). MR MR2240234 (2007g:19004)
[21] William G. Dwyer, Philip S. Hirschhorn, Daniel M. Kan, and Jeffrey H. Smith, Homo-
     topy limit functors on model categories and homotopical categories, Mathematical Sur-
     veys and Monographs, vol. 113, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2004.
     MR MR2102294 (2005k:18027)
[22] A. D. Elmendorf, I. Kriz, M. A. Mandell, and J. P. May, Rings, modules, and algebras
     in stable homotopy theory, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997, With an
     appendix by M. Cole. MR 97h:55006
[23] Leonard Evens, A generalization of the transfer map in the cohomology of groups, Trans.
     Amer. Math. Soc. 108 (1963), 54–65. MR MR0153725 (27 #3686)
[24] Michikazu Fujii, Cobordism theory with reality, Math. J. Okayama Univ. 18 (1975/76), no. 2,
     171–188. MR MR0420597 (54 #8611)
[25] Peter Gabriel and Friedrich Ulmer, Lokal präsentierbare Kategorien, Lecture Notes in Math-
     ematics, Vol. 221, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1971. MR MR0327863 (48 #6205)
[26] J. P. C. Greenlees and J. P. May, Equivariant stable homotopy theory, Handbook of algebraic
     topology, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995, pp. 277–323. MR MR1361893 (96j:55013)
[27]         , Localization and completion theorems for M U-module spectra, Ann. of Math. (2)
     146 (1997), no. 3, 509–544. MR MR1491447 (99i:55012)
[28] A. Grothendieck, Revêtements étales et groupe fondamental (SGA 1), Documents
     Mathématiques (Paris) [Mathematical Documents (Paris)], 3, Société Mathématique de
     France, Paris, 2003, Séminaire de géométrie algébrique du Bois Marie 1960–61. [Algebraic
     Geometry Seminar of Bois Marie 1960-61], Directed by A. Grothendieck, With two papers by
                                 KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                       219


     M. Raynaud, Updated and annotated reprint of the 1971 original [Lecture Notes in Math.,
     224, Springer, Berlin; MR0354651 (50 #7129)]. MR MR2017446 (2004g:14017)
[29] Michael A Hill and Michael J Hopkins, Equivariant Multiplicative Closure, arXiv:1303.4479
     [math.AT], March 2013.
[30] Philip S. Hirschhorn, Model categories and their localizations, Mathematical Surveys and
     Monographs, vol. 99, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2003. MR MR1944041
     (2003j:18018)
[31] M. J. Hopkins and P. Goerss, Multiplicative stable homotopy theory, unpublished manuscript,
     1996.
[32] Michael J. Hopkins and Jeffrey H. Smith, Nilpotence and stable homotopy theory. II, Ann.
     of Math. (2) 148 (1998), no. 1, 1–49. MR 99h:55009
[33] Mark Hovey, Smith ideals of structured ring spectra, arXiv:1401.2850.
[34]         , Model categories, Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, vol. 63, American Math-
     ematical Society, Providence, RI, 1999. MR MR1650134 (99h:55031)
[35] Po Hu and Igor Kriz, Real-oriented homotopy theory and an analogue of the Adams-Novikov
     spectral sequence, Topology 40 (2001), no. 2, 317–399. MR MR1808224 (2002b:55032)
[36] Sören Illman, Smooth equivariant triangulations of G-manifolds for G a finite group, Math.
     Ann. 233 (1978), no. 3, 199–220. MR 0500993 (58 #18474)
[37]         , The equivariant triangulation theorem for actions of compact Lie groups, Math.
     Ann. 262 (1983), no. 4, 487–501. MR 696520 (85c:57042)
[38] Peter T. Johnstone, Sketches of an elephant: a topos theory compendium. Vol. 1, Oxford
     Logic Guides, vol. 43, The Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 2002.
     MR 1953060 (2003k:18005)
[39] John D. S. Jones, The Kervaire invariant of extended power manifolds, Topology 17 (1978),
     no. 3, 249–266. MR 508888 (80g:55026)
[40] Gregory Maxwell Kelly, Basic concepts of enriched category theory, London Mathematical So-
     ciety Lecture Note Series, vol. 64, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1982. MR 651714
     (84e:18001)
[41] Michel A. Kervaire, A manifold which does not admit any differentiable structure, Comment.
     Math. Helv. 34 (1960), 257–270.
[42] Michel A. Kervaire and John W. Milnor, Groups of homotopy spheres. I, Ann. of Math. (2)
     77 (1963), 504–537.
[43] Peter S. Landweber, Conjugations on complex manifolds and equivariant homotopy of M U ,
     Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 74 (1968), 271–274. MR MR0222890 (36 #5940)
[44]         , Homological properties of comodules over M U∗ (M U) and BP∗ (BP), Amer. J. Math.
     98 (1976), no. 3, 591–610. MR 0423332 (54 #11311)
[45] Miguel L. Laplaza, Coherence for distributivity, Coherence in categories, Springer, Berlin,
     1972, pp. 29–65. Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 281. MR 0335598 (49 #379a)
[46] J. P. Levine, Lectures on groups of homotopy spheres, Algebraic and geometric topology (New
     Brunswick, N.J., 1983), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1126, Springer, Berlin, 1985, pp. 62–95.
     MR 802786 (87i:57031)
[47] G. Lewis, J. P. May, and J. McClure, Ordinary RO(G)-graded cohomology, Bull. Amer. Math.
     Soc. (N.S.) 4 (1981), no. 2, 208–212. MR 598689 (82e:55008)
[48] L. G. Lewis, J. P. May, and M. Steinberger, Equivariant stable homotopy theory, Lecture
     Notes in Mathematics, vol. 1213, Springer–Verlag, New York, 1986.
[49] J. Lubin and J. Tate, Formal complex multiplication in local fields, Annals of Mathematics
     81 (1965), 380–387.
[50] Saunders Mac Lane and Ieke Moerdijk, Sheaves in geometry and logic, Universitext, Springer-
     Verlag, New York, 1994, A first introduction to topos theory, Corrected reprint of the 1992
     edition. MR MR1300636 (96c:03119)
[51] Saunders MacLane, Categories for the working mathematician, second ed., Graduate Texts
     in Mathematics, vol. 5, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1998. MR 1712872 (2001j:18001)
[52] Mark Mahowald and Martin Tangora, Some differentials in the Adams spectral sequence,
     Topology 6 (1967), 349–369. MR MR0214072 (35 #4924)
[53] M. A. Mandell and J. P. May, Equivariant orthogonal spectra and S-modules, Mem. Amer.
     Math. Soc. 159 (2002), no. 755, x+108. MR MR1922205 (2003i:55012)
[54] M. A. Mandell, J. P. May, S. Schwede, and B. Shipley, Model categories of diagram spectra,
     Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 82 (2001), no. 2, 441–512. MR MR1806878 (2001k:55025)
220                    M. A. HILL, M. J. HOPKINS, AND D. C. RAVENEL


[55] Michael A. Mandell, Equivariant symmetric spectra, Homotopy theory: relations with alge-
     braic geometry, group cohomology, and algebraic K-theory, Contemp. Math., vol. 346, Amer.
     Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2004, pp. 399–452. MR 2066508 (2005d:55019)
[56] J. P. May, The cohomology of restricted Lie algebras and of Hopf algebras, Ph.D. thesis,
     Princeton University, 1964.
[57] J. P. May, Equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory, CBMS Regional Conference Series
     in Mathematics, vol. 91, Published for the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences,
     Washington, DC, 1996, With contributions by M. Cole, G. Comezaña, S. Costenoble, A.
     D. Elmendorf, J. P. C. Greenlees, L. G. Lewis, Jr., R. J. Piacenza, G. Triantafillou, and S.
     Waner. MR MR1413302 (97k:55016)
[58] J. Peter May, E∞ ring spaces and E∞ ring spectra, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977, With con-
     tributions by Frank Quinn, Nigel Ray, and Jørgen Tornehave, Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
     Vol. 577. MR 58 #13008
[59] M. C. McCord, Classifying spaces and infinite symmetric products, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
     146 (1969), 273–298. MR 0251719 (40 #4946)
[60] R. James Milgram, Group representations and the Adams spectral sequence, Pacific J. Math.
     41 (1972), 157–182. MR 0304463 (46 #3598)
[61] H. R. Miller, On relations between Adams spectral sequences, with an application to the stable
     homotopy of a Moore space, Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra 20 (1981), 287–312.
[62] H. R. Miller and D. C. Ravenel, Morava stabilizer algebras and the localization of Novikov’s
     E2 –term, Duke Mathematical Journal 44 (1977), 433–447.
[63] H. R. Miller, D. C. Ravenel, and W. S. Wilson, Periodic phenomena in the Adams–Novikov
     spectral sequence, Annals of Mathematics 106 (1977), 469–516.
[64] Haynes Miller, Kervaire invariant one [after M. A. Hill, M. J. Hopkins, and D. C. Ravenel],
     Astérisque (2012), no. 348, Exp. No. 1029, vii, 65–98, Séminaire Bourbaki: Vol. 2010/2011.
     Exposés 1027–1042. MR 3050712
[65] J. W. Milnor, On the cobordism ring Ω∗ and a complex analogue, Part I, American Journal
     of Mathematics 82 (1960), 505–521.
[66] J. Morava, Noetherian localizations of categories of cobordism comodules, Annals of Mathe-
     matics 121 (1985), 1–39.
[67] D. G. Quillen, On the formal group laws of unoriented and complex cobordism theory, Bulletin
     of the American Mathematical Society 75 (1969), 1293–1298.
[68]         , Homotopical algebra, Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 43, Springer–Verlag, New
     York, 1972.
[69] Daniel Quillen, Elementary proofs of some results of cobordism theory using Steenrod oper-
     ations, Advances in Math. 7 (1971), 29–56 (1971). MR MR0290382 (44 #7566)
[70] D. C. Ravenel, The nonexistence of odd primary Arf invariant elements in stable homotopy
     theory, Math. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 83 (1978), 429–443.
[71]         , Complex cobordism and stable homotopy groups of spheres, second ed., AMS Chelsea
     Publishing, vol. 347, American Mathematical Society, 2004.
[72] Charles Rezk, Fibrations and homotopy colimits of simplicial sheaves, arXiv:math/9811038.
[73]         , Notes on the Hopkins-Miller theorem, Homotopy theory via algebraic geometry and
     group representations (Evanston, IL, 1997), Contemp. Math., vol. 220, Amer. Math. Soc.,
     Providence, RI, 1998, pp. 313–366. MR MR1642902 (2000i:55023)
[74] Stefan Schwede, An untitled book project about symmetric spectra, Available at
     http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/.
[75] Stefan Schwede and Brooke Shipley, Equivalences of monoidal model categories, Algebr.
     Geom. Topol. 3 (2003), 287–334 (electronic). MR MR1997322 (2004i:55026)
[76] Stefan Schwede and Brooke E. Shipley, Algebras and modules in monoidal model categories,
     Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 80 (2000), no. 2, 491–511. MR MR1734325 (2001c:18006)
[77] G. Segal, Classifying spaces and spectral sequences, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 34
     (1968), 105–112.
[78] Katsumi Shimomura, Novikov’s Ext2 at the prime 2, Hiroshima Math. J. 11 (1981), no. 3,
     499–513. MR MR635034 (83c:55027)
[79] Tammo tom Dieck, Transformation groups and representation theory, Lecture Notes in Math-
     ematics, vol. 766, Springer, Berlin, 1979. MR 551743 (82c:57025)
[80]         , Transformation groups, de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, vol. 8, Walter de
     Gruyter & Co., Berlin, 1987. MR 889050 (89c:57048)
                                  KERVAIRE INVARIANT ONE                                        221


[81] Vladimir Voevodsky, Open problems in the motivic stable homotopy theory. I, Motives, poly-
     logarithms and Hodge theory, Part I (Irvine, CA, 1998), Int. Press Lect. Ser., vol. 3, Int.
     Press, Somerville, MA, 2002, pp. 3–34. MR MR1977582 (2005e:14030)
[82]         , A possible new approach to the motivic spectral sequence for algebraic K-theory,
     Recent progress in homotopy theory (Baltimore, MD, 2000), Contemp. Math., vol. 293, Amer.
     Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002, pp. 371–379. MR MR1890744 (2003g:55011)
[83]         , On the zero slice of the sphere spectrum, Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova 246 (2004), no. Al-
     gebr. Geom. Metody, Svyazi i Prilozh., 106–115. MR MR2101286 (2005k:14042)
[84] Klaus Wirthmüller, Equivariant homology and duality, Manuscripta Math. 11 (1974), 373–
     390. MR MR0343260 (49 #8004)

   Department of Mathematics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904
   E-mail address: michael.a.hill@math.uva.edu

   Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138
   E-mail address: mjh@math.harvard.edu

   Department of Mathematics, Rochester University, Rochester, NY
   E-mail address: doug@math.rochester.edu
