                                                GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC
                                                                  SPECTRA


                                                         ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                                                   Abstract. We explain how to reconstruct the category of Artin–Tate R-motivic
                                                   spectra as a deformation of the purely topological C2 -equivariant stable category.
                                                   The special fiber of this deformation is algebraic, and equivalent to an appropriate
                                                   category of C2 -equivariant sheaves on the moduli stack of formal groups. As such,
arXiv:2010.10325v2 [math.AT] 30 Jun 2022




                                                   our results directly generalize the cofiber of τ philosophy that has revolutionized
                                                   classical stable homotopy theory.
                                                      A key observation is that the Artin–Tate subcategory of R-motivic spectra is
                                                   easier to understand than the previously studied cellular subcategory. In partic-
                                                   ular, the Artin–Tate category contains a variant of the τ map, which is a feature
                                                   conspicuously absent from the cellular category.




                                                                                      Contents
                                             1. Introduction                                                                               1
                                             2. Constructing the element ta                                                               17
                                             3. The ta-local category                                                                     19
                                             4. Galois reconstruction                                                                     24
                                             5. Modules over the cofiber of ta                                                            30
                                             6. The Chow t-structure and νR                                                               43
                                             7. The a-local category                                                                      52
                                             8. Completions                                                                               55
                                             9. Odd primes                                                                                60
                                             10. Examples and computations                                                                61
                                             Appendix A. Recollections on compact rigid generation                                        65
                                             Appendix B. Recollections on filtered objects                                                68
                                             Appendix C. A machine for deforming homotopy theories                                        70
                                             References                                                                                   75




                                                                                  1. Introduction
                                              A striking surprise of modern computational stable homotopy theory is that the
                                           category SH(C) of C-motivic spectra, as introduced by Morel and Voevodsky [MV99],
                                           has found use not only in algebraic geometry, but also in the computation of stable
                                           homotopy groups of spheres, a question of purely topological origin. In particular,
                                           the p-completed bi-graded homotopy groups of the unit in SH(C) record—in a precise
                                           sense—the Adams–Novikov spectral sequence for the sphere spectrum, including all
                                           differentials and extensions. The ultimate expression of this connection is the discovery
                                           that the cellular subcategory of p-complete C-motivic spectra is equivalent to a category
                                           of synthetic Adams–Novikov spectral sequences, and in particular has a purely homotopy
                                           theoretic description without reference to algebraic geometry.
                                                                                            1
2                ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   The first evidence that a large sector of the motivic category contains only topological
information appears in the work of Thomason on algebraic K-theory and étale cohomol-
ogy [Tho85]. As a consequence of this work, Thomason proves that for well-behaved
C-schemes X, there is an equivalence Kalg (X)[β −1 ]∧` ' KU(X(C))` , where β is a certain
                                                                     ∧

Bott element. These ideas have been refined over the years, culminating in the following
theorem.
Theorem 1.1 ([Voe02, DI10, Lev14, Lev15, Ghe18, GWX20, Pst18, GIKR18]).
  In SH(C) there is a map τ : S1 → (Gm )p which enjoys the following properties:
    (1. Generically Topological) The full subcategory of τ -local objects in SH(C)cell
                                                                                   p    is
          equivalent to Spp .
    (2. Algebraic Degeneration) The cofiber of τ (often denoted Cτ ) is a commutative
          algebra, and the category of dualizable modules over Cτ is equivalent to the
          category of p-completions of dualizable objects in QCoh(Mfg ), where Mfg is the
          moduli stack of formal groups.
    (3. Galois Reconstruction) There is a purely topological construction of SH(C)cell
                                                                                  p .

   We summarize this situation by saying that SH(C)cell
                                                     p   is a 1-parameter deformation
of p-complete spectra with parameter τ and a purely algebraic special fiber.
   Although it does not appear in the statement, understanding the algebraic cobordism
spectrum, MGL, is key to proving this theorem. The importance of MGL to the study
of cellular motivic spectra goes back to Voevodsky’s work on the effective slice filtration
[Voe02]. In that work, Voevosky conjectured that the effective slice filtration of the
unit over an algebraically closed field may be described in terms of the Adams-Novikov
spectral sequence. Levine later proved Voevodsky’s conjectures [Lev14, Lev15]. Voevod-
sky’s notion of “rigid homotopy groups” also foreshadowed algebraic degeneration. In
this framework he and Rezk predicted that the rigid Adams spectral sequence is equiva-
lent to the algebraic Novikov spectral sequence [Voe02, p. 20-21], a result later proven in
different language by Gheorghe–Wang–Xu [GWX20, Theorem 1.17]. The fact that the
category of p-complete C-motivic spectra is generically topological is strongly suggested
by results of Dugger–Isaksen [DI10, Section 2.6], though to the best of our knowledge the
full result did not appear in print until [Pst18]. The commutative algebra structure on
Cτ was first constructed by Gheorghe [Ghe18], and the category of modules over Cτ was
then identified by Gheorghe–Wang–Xu in [GWX20]. Finally, Pstragowski [Pst18] and
Gheorghe–Isaksen–Krause–Ricka [GIKR18] independently provided two different Galois
reconstructions of cellular p-complete C-motivic spectra.
   With the case of C resolved we raise the following natural question:
Question 1.2. To what extent can this theorem be extended to a general field k?
   As stated, this question is too imprecise to admit a definitive answer, so we begin
by refining two points of ambiguity: the appropriate subcategory of SH(k) one should
consider and the meaning of purely topological. In our study of this question we have
found that the appropriate subcategory is the category of Artin–Tate motivic spectra
(defined below). Notably, over R, if one restricts to the further subcategory of cellular
objects, it becomes significantly more difficult to construct a topological model.
Definition 1.3. The category of Artin–Tate motivic spectra over k is the smallest
stable full subcategory SH(k)AT ⊂ SH(k), closed under tensor products and colimits,
that contains the motives of finite étale k-algebras, P1k and (P1k )−1 .
   The phrase ‘purely topological’ has a double meaning. On the one hand it refers
to the input to the construction; it should not depend directly on the arithmetic of k,
instead using only the absolute Galois group, G, together with the character G → Z  b×
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                3


induced by the maximal cyclotomic extension of k 1. On the other hand it asks for a
construction which uses only the “standard machinery of homotopy theory.”
   The authors are not the first to take up questions of this nature. Positselski has
studied the question of Galois reconstruction for the category DM(k; F` )AT of mixed
Artin-Tate motives with mod ` coefficients [Pos11, Pos14]. With a few exceptions, he
has shown that when k is a finite, local or global field, then DM(k, F` )AT may be viewed
as a derived category of filtered discrete G-modules with restricted sub-quotients.
   In a different direction, work of Bachmann, Elmanto and Østvær shows that, up to a
completion, SH(S) is generically étale for a wide range of schemes S [Bac20, BEØ20].
In particular, Bachmann–Elmanto–Østvær show that, after a suitable completion, étale
localization corresponds to inverting τ . Note that τ may not exist in the homotopy of
the completed unit, so care must be taken to interpret this statement. Furthermore,
Bachmann showed that, again up to completion, the étale motivic category is equivalent
to the category of hypercomplete sheaves of spectra on the small étale site. Specializing
to the case S = Spec k, we find that, up to completion, the category of τ -local objects
in SH(k) admits a description in terms of Borel G-equivariant spectra.
   Previously, work of Behrens and Shah [BS20] had taken up the question of when a
suitable map τ exists over R. Although there is no map τ : S1 → (Gm )∧    2 in SH(R), they
prove that τ exists whenever a different class ρ : S0 → Gm has been killed. If only ρ2
is killed, but not ρ itself, then τ does not necessarily exist, but τ 2 does. Continuing in
this way, they make sense of inverting τ in any ρ-complete situation.
   In this paper we resolve Question 1.2 in the case k = R. This begins with the
observation that if one does not insist that the target of τ must be a completion of Gm ,
then a suitable replacement can easily be constructed.
Theorem 1.4. In SH(R)Ai2T there is an invertible object Q and a map t : S1 → Q2
which enjoys the following properties:
 (GT) The full subcategory of t-local objects in SH(R)Ai2T is equivalent to SpC2 ,i2 .
 (AD) The cofiber of t (denoted C t) is a commutative algebra, and the category of
      dualizable modules over C t is equivalent to the category of dualizable objects in
      the derived category of Mackey-functor MU∗ MU-comodules 2.
 (GR) There is a purely topological construction of SH(R)Ai2T . In particular, we con-
      struct a commutative algebra R• in filtered, C2 -equivariant spectra such that the
      category of filtered modules over R• is equivalent to SH(R)Ai2T . The commutative
      algebra R• is the even slice–décalage of the MUR -Adams tower for the sphere 3.
   We summarize this by saying that SH(R)Ai2T is a 1-parameter deformation of C2 -
equivariant stable homotopy theory with parameter t and purely algebraic special fiber.
   The romanization of the Devanagari letter t is ‘ta’ 4 and our choice of this symbol
will be explained in Remark 1.34. As in the case over C, we are also able to give an
explicit formula for the homotopy groups of C t, though since we have not yet set up the
appropriate notion of homotopy groups we will defer an explicit statement until later.
The subscript i2 appearing in the theorem statement refers to the category of modules
over the 2-completion of the unit. The reader who is worried by this departure from the
norm may wish to read the section on notations and conventions before proceeding.


   1More specifically, the p-complete category should only depend on the Z× component of this map.
                                                                           p
   2See Section 5 for a precise definition of this category.
   3See Section 4 for precise definitions.
    4However, the reader who is not familiar with the Devanagari alphabet is advised that the pronun-
ciation of t in the majority of South Asian languages using Devanagari is given in IPA by /t”@/, which
is closer to ‘tuh’ in English than ‘ta.’
4                  ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


  With the resolution of Question 1.2 in the case of R, the authors are hopeful that we
might see this question resolved in its entirety in the near future.

1.1. Examples of Artin–Tate motivic spectra.
   In this subsection, which is preparatory to all later material, we give a more compre-
hensive introduction to the category of Artin–Tate motivic spectra over a field. This
begins with introducing the smaller subcategories of Artin and Tate objects, which to-
gether generate the category of Artin–Tate objects. The bulk of the subsection is spent
building a collection of important examples of Artin–Tate motivic spectra. Over R a
special role is played by the invertible objects and so we focus specific attention there.
We close the section by discussing homotopy groups.
Definition 1.5. The categories of Artin, Tate and Artin–Tate motivic spectra over k
are the stable, full subcategories of SH(k), closed under tensor products and colimits,
with the following generators:
       • The category of Artin motivic spectra, SH(k)A , is generated by the motives of
         finite étale k-algebras.
       • The category of Tate motivic spectra, SH(k)T , is generated by the motives of
         P1k and (P1k )−1 5.
       • The category of Artin–Tate motivic spectra, SH(k)AT , is generated by the mo-
         tives of finite étale k-algebras together with P1k and (P1k )−1 .
Since these subcategories are closed under tensor products and colimits, they each inherit
the structure of a stable, presentably symmetric monoidal category from SH(k). 6
   We now turn to examples of objects in each of these categories, starting with the
trivial and heading towards the non-trival.
Example 1.6. Every stable, presentably symmetric monoidal category admits a unique
symmetric monoidal functor from the category of spectra [Lur17, Corollary 4.8.2.19] 7.
This gives us objects X ⊗ 1k for every spectrum X. Of particular interest are the integer
simplicial suspensions of the unit, Sn ⊗1k .
  Inductively applying `
                       the homotopy purity theorem [MV99, Theorem 3.2.23] to the
decomposition Pnk = Ank Pn−1
                          k  , we learn that:
Example 1.7 ([DI05, Example 2.12]). For each n, the motivic spectrum associated to
Pnk is Tate.
  More generally, using a Bialynicki-Birula decomposition, Wendt shows that any
smooth projective variety which admits a Gm -action whose fixed points are discrete
and rational is Tate [Wen10] 8.
Example 1.8 ([DI05, Theorem 6.4], [Hoy15, Proposition 8.1], [BH20a, Proposition
8.12]). Each of the following commutative algebras is Tate:
                                MGL,       kq,    kgl,    MZ,     M Fp .
Example 1.9. Essentially by definition, the Galois correspondence provides functors

    5This category is sometimes referred to as the cellular category following [DI05].
   6In the sequel, we will state without remark results that are only known to be true after the char-
acteristic of k is inverted. The reader is invited to restrict themself to k of characteristic zero if they
prefer.
   7
    Another way of saying this is that Sp is the initial object of CAlg(P rL,stab ).
   8In the case where the fixed points are not rational, the authors wonder what conditions are necessary
to guarantees the motive is Artin–Tate.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                 5


                                                   finite, etale op
                   n                  o          n              o
                    finite, continuous
                    Gal(k/k)-sets                  k-algebras
                                                                               Smk


                                                      SH(k)A                 SH(k),
which give our first examples of Artin objects.
   Since the functor in the example above sends disjoint unions to sums there is no loss
in generality if we restrict to transitive Gal(k/k)-sets (field extensions). In the case of
R this gives only two objects: Spec(R), which we will temporarily denote 1R since is it
the monoidal unit of the category, and Spec(C). Using the natural map we get a cofiber
sequence
                                         Spec(C) → 1R −
                                                          a
                                                      → SC .                                      (1)
On the level of C-points (with Galois action), this cofiber sequence gives the represen-
tation sphere Sσ .
   Given a quadric in the plane, V , we can take its closure in P2k to obtain V which is
a form of P1k . If we let x1 , . . . , xn denote the points at infinity, then by the homotopy
purity theorem [MV99, Theorem 3.2.23] we have a cofiber sequence
                                                   M
                                       V →V →           P1k(xi ) .
                                                  i=1,...,n

Under the assumption that V admits a rational point, V is just P1k , and so we obtain our
first non-trivial example of a motive which is neither Artin nor Tate, but is Artin–Tate:
Example 1.10. The motive of an affine quadric which admits a rational point is Artin–
Tate.
  Over R there is a particular affine quadric of interest to us. It is the object Q which
appeared in the statement of Theorem 1.4.
Example 1.11. Let Q := {x2 + y 2 = 1} ⊂ A2R , which we shall call the algebraic circle.
Q has the additional property that it is a form of Gm 9. Its group scheme structure
comes from the usual rule for multiplication of complex numbers, namely
                       (x1 , y1 ) · (x2 , y2 ) = (x1 x2 − y1 y2 , x1 y2 + y1 x2 ).
   In Section 2 we will construct the maps t : S1 → Qp using our explicit understanding
of this group scheme.
Proposition 1.12 ([Hu05, Proposition 1.1]). There is an equivalence Q ⊗ SC ' P1R . In
particular, both SC and Q are invertible.
   At this point we are ready to define the appropriate notion of homotopy groups for
studying SH(R)AT . In the case of SH(C)AT , the category has a bi-graded family of
compact invertible generators given by the spheres Sp−2w ⊗(P1C )⊗w . Therefore, it is
typical to study objects at the level of their bigraded homotopy groups, given by
                            C
                           πp,w (X) := π0 Map(Sp−2w ⊗(P1C )⊗w , X).
Similarly, SH(R)T has a bi-graded family of compact invertible generators given by the
spheres Sp−2w ⊗(P1R )⊗w , and it is typical to study objects through their bi-graded homo-
topy groups. Using Proposition 1.12 and Equation (1), the category SH(R)AT has a tri-
graded family of compact invertible generators given by the spheres Sp−w ⊗(SC )⊗q−w ⊗
(P1R )⊗w , and we will study most objects through their tri-graded homotopy groups.
   9By Cartier duality, forms of G are classified by rank 1 lattices with Galois action. Q corresponds
                                  m
to the unique nontrival action.
6               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Notation 1.13. We endow the categories Sp, SpC2 , SH(C) and SH(R) with Picard
gradings by spheres as follows:
           Category Picard      Spheres
            Sp         Z              Sp ' (S 1 )⊗p
            SpC2       Z×Z            Sp+qσ ' (S 1 )⊗p ⊗ (S σ )⊗q
            SH(C)      Z×Z            Sp,w ' (S 1 )⊗p−2w ⊗ (P1C )⊗w
            SH(R)      Z×Z×Z          Sp,q,w ' (S 1 )⊗p−w ⊗ (S C )⊗q−w ⊗ (P1R )⊗w
   For any p, q, w ∈ Z, and any R-motivic spectrum X, we let πp,q,w
                                                              R
                                                                    X denote the group
of homotopy classes of maps,
                         (S 1 )⊗p−w ⊗ (S C )⊗q−w ⊗ (P1R )⊗w → X.
Example 1.14. For convenience we record what the invertible objects considered in
this section look like under this new notation:
                       = 1R
                S0,0,0 ∼               S1,0,0 ∼
                                              = S1     S0,1,0 ∼= SC
                 0,1,1 ∼                 1,0,1 ∼         1,1,1 ∼ 1
                S      = Gm             S      =Q      S       = PR
In the case of S0,0,0 we will often drop the indices for brevity, writing only S. The two
maps between Picard elements considered thus far, t and a, become
                     t ∈ π0,0,−1 Sp
                           R
                                             and         a ∈ π0,−1,0
                                                              R
                                                                     S.
Remark 1.15. The tri-graded spheres in SH(R)AT which are Tate are precisely the
spheres of the form Sp,q,q . For this reason the Tate category only sees a ‘slice’ of the
total information present in the tri-graded homotopy groups.
   The tri-graded spheres in SH(R)AT which are Artin are precisely the spheres of the
form Sp,q,0 . The Artin category similarly only sees a ‘slice’ of the total homotopy groups.
1.2. Comparison functors.
   The two simplest ways to interrogate a category are to study specific objects and to
study the network of functors which relate it to other categories. While the previous
subsection provided preperatory background on specific objects, this subsection sets up
the suite of functors which we will use to produce and study more general objects. In the
specific case of R this means studying the various ways we can move between SH(R),
SH(C), SpC2 and Sp.
Recollection 1.16. Given a finite extension of fields i : k → `, there are two pairs of
adjunctions and one extra functor coming from the six functor formalism
    i∗ : SH(k)  SH(`) : i∗ ,     i! : SH(`)  SH(k) : i!     and i] : SH(`) → SH(k)
where i is symmetric monoidal. Since i is smooth, proper and unramified we have
        ∗

equivalences i! ' i∗ ' i] and i! ' i∗ [Hoy17, Theorems 6.9 and 6.18]. These equivalences
tell us that
     (1) i∗ and i∗ both commute with all limits and colimits.
     (2) If X is a smooth `-scheme, then i∗ X ' X, where the second copy of X is
         considered as a k-scheme.
    In Appendix A, as an example of the techniques showcased there, we show that for
fields of characteristic zero there is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal
categories
                              SH(`) ' Mod(SH(k); Spec(`)),
and i∗ i (−) ' Spec(`) ⊗ −. This equivalence tells us that no new information enters
        ∗

the picture when we pass to a field extension. Specializing to the case of C/R the above
equivalence becomes
                             SH(C) ' Mod(SH(R); Spec(C)).
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                7


   Using the descriptions of i∗ and i∗ i∗ we can conclude that both i∗ and i∗ restrict to
the full subcategory of Artin–Tate objects. Thus we obtain a similar description of the
Artin–Tate category of a field extension:

                              SH(`)AT ' Mod(SH(k)AT ; Spec(`)).

Specializing to the case of C/R we will sometimes denote Spec(C) by Ca since it is (by
the definition of a) the cofiber of the map a : S0,−1,0 → S0,0,0 . The above equivalence
becomes

                                SH(C)AT ' Mod(SH(R)AT ; Ca).

   At this point we turn to studying the case of R more closely. Though some of the
things we do after this point have obvious analogs in other cases, many of our key
maneuvers implicitly rely on the fact that R has a finite (and well-understood) absolute
Galois group. In particular, we will now assume that the reader is familiar with C2 -
equivariant homotopy theory as in [HHR16]. Equivariant homotopy theory first enters
the picture through the Betti realization functors of [MV99, Section 3.3].

Recollection 1.17. There is a commutative diagram of symmetric monoidal left ad-
joints:
                                                (−)C
                          SH(R)                                   SH(C)

                                      Sp,q,w           Sp+q,w
                              Be                                       Be


                                      Sp+qσ             Sp+q
                                                 Φe
                           SpC2                                     Sp .

   In the above diagram, (−)C is the base change functor, Φe is the underlying functor
and Be are the Betti realization functors, induced by the assigment X 7→ X(C). The
inner square describing these functors on Picard objects can be verified by considering
Q, Gm and S 1 directly 10.

Remark 1.18. Since the Betti realization of Sp,q,w is Sp+qσ , we think of w as recording
the motivic weight and p, q as providing a copy of RO(C2 ) in each weight. The Tate
spheres are those of the form Sp,q,q , so in the bigraded world the number of σ’s in
the RO(C2 )-grading must equal the motivic weight. This restriction blinds one to the
existence of a weight shifting element t in RO(C2 ) grading 0, which is the true analog
of the C-motivic τ .

  Having discussed Betti realization, we now introduce the less well-known functors c
and cC/R which provide sections of Betti realization.

Recollection 1.19. There are symmetric monoidal left adjoints c and cC/R , which fit
into the commutative diagram



   10The observation that spurred the authors to begin this project was that upon restricting to cat-
egories of Tate objects the induced square on Picard groups is not a pullback, but with Artin–Tate
objects it is in fact a pullback.
8              ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                     Sp+qσ                    Sp,q,0                  Sp+qσ

                                              idSpC
                                                      2


                                 cC/R                         Be
                      SpC2                SH(R)                       SpC2

                          Φe                     (−)C                      Φe


                                 c                             Be
                       Sp                 SH(C)                           Sp

                                               idSp



                       Sp                 Sp,0              Sp .
   The functor c is the unique symmetric monoidal left adjoint coming from the fact
that Sp is the unit of P rL,stab (see Example 1.6). The functor cC/R is constructed in
[HO16], by beginning with the functor
                               {finite C2 −sets} → SH(R)
from Example 1.9 and then extending it to all of SpC2 .
   Since they are symmetric monoidal left adjoints, it is easy to see that the composites
Be◦c : Sp → Sp and Be◦cC/R : SpC2 → SpC2 are equivalent to the identity. In fact, upon
restricting to the appropriate target category we uncover something more interesting:
Theorem 1.20 ([Lev14, HO16, HO18]). The symmetric monoidal functors c and cC/R
factor through the respective categories of Artin objects and provide equivalences,
                      '                                               '
                      → SH(C)A
               c : Sp −                  and                          → SH(R)A .
                                                          cC/R : SpC2 −
Corollary 1.21. The induced maps,
               c          Be                       C2          cC/R         C2  Be
         πp S →
              − πp,0
                 C
                     S −→ πp S          and       πp+qσ S −−−→ πp,q,0
                                                                R
                                                                      S −→ πp+qσ S
are isomorphisms for all p and q.
Remark 1.22. This corollary provides an identification of π0,0,0
                                                               R
                                                                   S with the Burnside
ring of C2 . It is isomorphic to Z ⊕ Z, with generators 1 and [C2 ] and the relation
[C2 ]2 = 2[C2 ].
   Morel’s identification of πn,n 1k in terms of Milnor–Witt K-theory provides another
way of assigning names to elements of π0,0,0
                                           R
                                               S [Mor06]. In these terms π0,0,0
                                                                          R
                                                                                S is gen-
erated by 1 and η[−1], subject to the relation (η[−1]) = −2η[−1]. We denote by ρ
                                                        2

the element −[−1]. The translation between the two bases described above is given by
ηρ = 2 − [C2 ].
Remark 1.23. When working over a general field one might think to replace the Betti
realization by some variant of etale localization (see [ES19]). The analog of this the-
orem would be that the category of Artin objects is already etale local. However, in
many examples (such as finite fields) one consequence of the Morel connectivity theorem
[Mor05] is that this is not true. An important precursor to answering Question 1.2 will
be producing the variant of equivariant homotopy theory which appears as the category
of Artin objects.
Remark 1.24. Using the functors c and cC/R the mapping spaces in SH(C) and SH(R)
can be upgraded into mapping spectra and mapping C2 -spectra respectively.
Summary 1.25. There are commuting diagrams
                 GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                              9


                                                                    idSpC
                                                                            2

                             (−)C
                 SH(R)              SH(C)           SpC2     cC/R   SH(R)       Be
                                                                                     SpC2
                    Be                    Be           Φe              (−)C            Φe
                               e
                              Φ                              c                  Be
                  SpC2                Sp             Sp             SH(C)            Sp,
                                                                     idSp

   and various functors considered in this section enjoy the following properties:
    (1) Each of (−)C , Be, Φe , c and cC/R is a symmetric monoidal left adjoint.
    (2) Both (−)C and Φe are right adjoints as well.
    (3) All of the functors restrict to the categories of Artin–Tate objects and retain the
        properties listed in (1) and (2). In later sections we will almost exclusively deal
        with these restrictions so we will not use distinct notation for them.
    (4) On Picard elements the functors in the digrams above behave as follows:
           Be(1p,q,w
                 R    )∼= 1C 2
                            p+qσ
                                  Be(1s,w
                                        C )=S
                                             ∼ s         cC/R (1p+qσ
                                                                C2 ) = 1R
                                                                      ∼ p,q,0
                  =1
           c(Ss ) ∼               (1p,q,w )C ∼
                                             =1          Φe (1p+qσ ) ∼
                      s,0                        p+q,w
                         C                     R        C            = Sp+q
                                                                       C2

Proof. The only one of these which we have not already discussed is (2). The functor
(−)C can be described as tensoring up to Ca. Since Ca is dualizable this functor
commutes with all limits and colimits. Similarly, we may conclude that Φe commutes
with all limits and colimits.                                                     
1.3. R-motivic spectra as a deformation.
    In this subsection we refine the statement of Theorem 1.4 into a sequence of precise
claims which we will verify across the remainder of the paper. We summarized both
Theorem 1.1 and Theorem 1.4 by saying that the category of Artin–Tate motivic spectra
is a 1-parameter deformation of a purely topological category. To start, we clarify this,
first over C and then over R.
     (1) There is a distinguished element of the p-complete homotopy groups over C,
         τ ∈ π0,−1 Sp , which maps to 1 under Betti realization 11. [HKO11b, Lemma 23]
     (2) The Betti realization functor factors through the category of τ -local objects and
         provides a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                                    Mod(SH(C)AipT ; Sp [τ −1 ]) ' Spip .
         The idea for this goes back to [DI10, Section 2.6], but was first proven in [Pst18].
     (3) The category SH(C)AipT can be equipped with the structure of a SpFil    ip -algebra.
         More explicitly, this means we have a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                                           i∗ : SpFil       AT
                                                  ip → SH(C)ip ,

         which sends the shift map in SpFil
                                        ip to τ . As a consequence of this Cτ acquires
         the structure of a commutative algebra, a fact originally proven by Gheorghe
         [Ghe18].
     (4) The category of modules over Cτ is equivalent to a renormalization of the derived
         category of even BP∗ BP-comodules. More specifically we have
                               Mod(SH(C)AipT ; Cτ ) ' IndCoh(Mfg )ip .
                                                      ⊗w
           This equivalence sends C t ⊗Ss,w to Σs−2w ωG/M  fg
                                                              , and on the level of homotopy
           groups it induces an equivalence
                              π C (Cτ ) ∼
                                    s,w = Ext
                                             2w−s,w
                                                    (BP∗ , BP∗ ).
                                                    BP∗ BP

   11The Betti realization map π C
                                     0,−1 Sp → π0 Sp is an isomorphism so the latter property uniquely
identifies τ .
10                 ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


          The equivalence of categories is due to Gheorghe–Wang–Xu [GWX20], though
          the above isomorphism of groups was first proven by Isaksen [Isa19, Proposition
          6.2.5] and then upgraded to an isomorphism of rings with all higher structure
          by Gheorghe [Ghe18].
      (5) There is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories between SH(C)AipT
          and Syneven
                   MU,ip , where the latter is the category of even MU-synthetic spectra
          constructed in [Pst18]. Notably, Pstrągowski’s construction uses no algebraic
          geometry, and requires only knowledge of the homotopy commutative ring object
          MU in Sp. The comparison between these two categories proceeds via the close
          relationship between MGL and MU.
      (6) The adjunction i is affine in the sense that there is a commutative algebra R•C
          in SpFil
                ip and an equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories under Spip
                                                                                  Fil


                                   SH(C)AipT ' Mod(SpFil   C
                                                     ip ; R• ).

          Moreover, the commutative algebra R•C admits an explicit construction which
          uses no algebraic geometry. It is given by
                               R•C := Tot∗ τ≥2• MU⊗∗+1
                                                       
                                                     p   .
        This construction uses only the commutative algebra MU in Sp, and again the
        comparison proceeds via the close relationship between MGL and MU. This
        approach is due to Gheorghe–Isaksen–Krause–Ricka [GIKR18].
   In fact, every aspect of the picture over C extends to R in the simplest reasonable
way. The reader who has previously studied R-motivic spectra may find this rather
surprising (as the authors did), and we suggest that this highlights the primacy of the
Artin–Tate category over the Tate category.
    (1) There is a distinguished element of the p-complete homotopy groups over R,
        t ∈ π0,0,−1 Sp , which maps to 1 under Betti realization 12. We will construct t
        in Section 2.
    (2) The Betti realization functor factors through the category of t-local objects,
        and provides a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                               Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [t−1 ]) ' SpC2 ,i2 .
          This will be proven as the main theorem of Section 3.
                                                                             i2 -algebra.
      (3) The category SH(R)Ai2T can be equipped with the structure of a SpFil
          More explicitly, this means we have a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                                      i∗ : SpFil       AT
                                             i2 → SH(R)i2

                                          i2 to t. As a consequence of this C t acquires
          which sends the shift map in SpFil
          the structure of a commutative algebra. We may also regard SH(R)Ai2T as a
          SpC2 -algebra via the functor cC/R . Tensoring these two functors together we
          obtain a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                                     i∗ : SpFil           AT
                                            C2 ,i2 → SH(R)i2 .

          These statements will be proven in Section 4 as part of Proposition 4.5.
      (4) The category of modules over C t is equivalent to a renormalization of the de-
          rived category of an abelian category of equivariant BP∗ BP-comodules. More
          precisely, we have an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                   Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' Mod(SpC2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ).

     12As above, the Betti realization map π R          → π0C2 Sp is an isomorphism so t is uniquely
                                            0,0,−1 Sp
identified.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                            11

                                                                       ⊗w
        This equivalence sends C t ⊗ Sp,q,w to Σ(p−w)+(q−w)σ Z2 ⊗ ωG/M      fg
                                                                               and on the
        level of tri-graded rings of homotopy groups it induces an isomorphism 13
                       Ct ∼          Exts,2w
                               M
                                                             C2
                                        BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ⊗ πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ).
                 R
                πp,q,w    =
                             w+a−s=p

        This will be proven as the main theorem of Section 5.
    (5) The adjunction i is affine in the sense that there is a commutative algebra R•R in
          C2 ,i2 and an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories under
        SpFil
        SpFil
          C2 ,i2
                                SH(R)Ai2T ' Mod(SpFil       R
                                                  C2 ,i2 ; R• ).

        Moreover, the commutative algebra R•R admits an explicit construction which
        uses no algebraic geometry. It is given by
                                                      
                             R•R := Tot∗ P2• MU⊗∗+1R,2   ,

        where Pn is the functor which takes the nth slice cover of a C2 spectrum. This
        construction uses only the commutative algebra MUR in SpC2 introduced by
        Landweber [Lan67, Lan68]. The comparison proceeds via understanding the
        close relationship between MGL and MUR over R. This will be proven as the
        main theorem of Section 4.
   Using the second special element of the tri-graded homotopy groups of the sphere,
a ∈ π0,−1,0
     R
            S, we can delve further into the structure of SH(R)Ai2T . In order to do this we
begin with a digression on the element aσ in C2 -equivariant homotopy theory.
Proposition 1.26. The category SpC2 can be viewed as a 1-parameter family with
coordinate aσ , special fiber Sp and generic fiber Sp in the sense that:
      • The category of a-local objects can be identified with spectra, i.e. there is an
        equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                                  Mod(SpC2 ; S[a−1
                                                σ ]) ' Sp .

      • The cofiber of aσ , which we will denote Caσ , can be endowed with a commutative
        algebra structure and there is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal
        categories
                                  Mod(SpC2 ; Caσ ) ' Sp .
      • There is a monoidal left adjoint
                                      i∗ : SpGr → SpC2 ,
        which sends 1(1) to Sσ 14. Moreover, this adjunction is affine in the sense that
        we have an equivalence of categories
                                  SpC2 ' Mod(SpGr ; R•C2 ),
        where RnC2 ' ΣRP−n−1
                        −∞ .

   This result is certainly well known to experts. We give a proof in Appendix A
as Examples A.8 and A.9. Since therein the pair of functors Φe and ΦC2 out of SpC2
become identified with modding out by aσ and inverting aσ respectively, this proposition
produces a diagram of symmetric monoidal left adjoints

   13If one wants the tensor product can be moved outside the Ext, but then it must be taken in a
derived sense.
   14The authors will return to the question of whether this functor can be upgraded to a monoidal
functor in from filtered spectra in a future work.
12                   ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                            ΦC2                                           Φe
        Sp                                          SpC2                                     Sp
                     '                                                           '
                                              (−)[a−1
                                                   σ ]
                                                           Ca⊗−

                     Mod(SpC2 ; S[a−1
                                   σ ])                            Mod(SpC2 ; Ca).
   We are now free to use the functor cC/R to push our description of SpC2 as a 1-
parameter deformation into SH(R)Ai2T and obtain a description of that category as a
2-parameter deformation of Spi2 with coordinates t and a. For example, we can give Ca
the structure of a commutative algebra since cC/R (aσ ) = a. Note that by Summary 1.25
the commutative algebra structure obtained in this way is the same as the one coming
from the equivalence Ca ' Spec(C).
   While the 1-parameter deformations considered up to now had only a special and
a generic fiber, when considered as a 2-parameter deformation SH(R)Ai2T has various
“limiting behavoirs” which we presently study. Since each parameter can be set to either
0 or 1, or left unspecified, there are 9 total categories of interest. We summarize what
we know in the following table:
                          unspecified                        t=0                     t=1

          unspecified      SH(R)i2 AT
                                          Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )        SpC2 ,i2
               a=0         SH(C)i2 AT
                                                         IndCoh(Mfg )i2               Spi2
               a=1             ?         Mod(Sp; F2 [u2σ ]) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )           Spi2
   The only identification in this table which we have not yet discussed is the one in
the bottom middle. However, one can easily obtain this from the identification of C t-
modules and Lemma A.10:
        Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t[a−1 ]) ' Spi2 ⊗SpC2 ,i2 Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t)
                                     ' Spi2 ⊗SpC2 ,i2 Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )
                                     ' Mod(Spi2 ; ΦC2 Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )
                                     ' Mod(Sp; F2 [u2σ ]) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ),
where the final step is just the identification of ΦC2 Z with F2 [u2σ ] where u2σ is a poly-
nomial generator in degree 2. As a corollary, we can give a description of the tri-graded
homotopy groups of several objects in SH(R)Ai2T in terms of better understood categories.
Corollary 1.27. There are isomorphisms of rings:
   (1) πp,q,w
         R
              (Ca) ∼= πp+q,w
                       C
                             S,
   (2) πp,q,w (Ca ⊗ C t) ∼
         R                      2w−p−q,w
                         = ExtBP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ),
   (3) πp,q,w (Ca[t ]p ) ∼
         R          −1
                         = πp+q Sp ,
                    ∼
   (4) πp,q,w (C t) = w+a−s=p Exts,2w
                      L                                   C2
                                     BP∗ BP (BP∗ , BP∗ ⊗ πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ),
         R
                                                                           
   (5) π R (C t[a−1 ]) =∼  L
                                         F2 {u2a } ⊗F Exts,2w (BP∗ , BP∗ /2) ,
             p,q,w                 w+2a−s=p                    2    BP∗ BP
     (6) πp,q,w
          R                 ∼ π C2 S2 ,
                (S2 [t−1 ]) =    p,q
     (7) πp,q,w (S2 [a−1 , t−1 ]) ∼
                                  = πp S2 .
    We now turn to the category of a-local objects, only labelled “?” in the table above.
It is one of the most mysterious actors in the story told in this paper and we shall devote
Section 7 to its study. As we shall see, it records a deformation of the category of spectra
sitting between that which corresponds to the Adams–Novikov spectral sequence and
that which corresponds to the classical Adams spectral sequence. The role it plays in
mediating between these two spectral sequences remains to be understood.
    Since a = cC/R (aσ ) and aσ = Be(a), we can construct a diagram of symmetric
monoidal left adjoints
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                              13


                                      (−)[a−1 ]
                            SH(R)                 Mod(SH(R); S[a−1 ])
                                 Be                            Be
                                               ΦC2
                               SpC2                          Sp .
As the diagram shows, the category Mod(SH(R); S2 [a−1 ]) can be viewed as the target
category of an “R-motivic geometric fixed points” functor. Since ΦC2 (MUR ) ' MO, one
might guess that Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) is related to Pstragowski’s synthetic category
SynMO 15. Indeed, we construct a comparison functor.
Proposition 1.28. There is a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                          ReF2 : Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) → SynF2
which sends Sp,q,w to Sp,w .
   On the other side, an interesting functor into Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) may be con-
structed using the Bachmann–Hoyois motivic norm functors.
Recollection 1.29. In [BH20b], Bachmann and Hoyois construct symmetric monoidal
norm functors along finite étale maps. These norm functors may be thought of as an
indexed tensor product and in the case of R they fit into the following diagram showing
compatability with the Hill–Hopkins–Ravenel norm functors in equivariant homotopy
theory [BH20b, Section 11]:
                                                    NmR
                                      SH(C)           C
                                                            SH(R)
                                           Be                  Be
                                                NmC
                                                  e
                                                    2
                                          Sp                SpC2 .
From [BH20b, Example 3.5, Lemma 4.4, Example 4.10] we can conclude that on bigraded
                s,w     s,s,2w
spheres NmR C (SC ) ' S                        C is polynomial of degree 2 and when
                               . The functor NmR
applied to a direct sum we have a formula [BH20b, Corollary 5.13]
                    NmR              R                       R
                      C (X ⊕ Y ) ' NmC (X) ⊕ i∗ (X ⊗ Y ) ⊕ NmC (Y ).

Since NmR C commutes with sifted colimits, it follows from the above that it restricts to
a functor on the categories of Artin–Tate objects
                                            AT
                                 NmR
                                   C : SH(R)   → SH(C)AT .
  While the norm functor NmR
                           C is not exact, it becomes exact after a is inverted.

Proposition 1.30. The composite
                           NmR                  (−)[a−1 ]
               SH(C)Ai2T −−−→
                            C
                              SH(R)Ai2T −−−−−→ Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ])
is a symmetric monoidal left adjoint. On Picard elements this composite sends Ss,w
                                                                               2   to
  s,∗,2w −1                         2
S2      [a ]. The map τ is sent to t .
  In conclusion, we have a pair of functors
                          NmR (−)[a−1 ]                                 ReF
               SH(C)Ai2T −−−C−−−−−→ Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) −−−→
                                                                  2
                                                                    SynF2 ,
which are each the identity on spectra after inverting t and τ . It would be very inter-
esting to obtain a better computational understanding of the a-local category and the
behavior of these two functors. More ambitiously, we ask:

  15The spectrum MO is a sum of copies of F , and as we shall see this implies Syn
                                                2                                MO ' SynF2 .
14                ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Question 1.31. Is there a good description of the full subcategory of a-local objects in
SH(R)Ai2T ? What geometric information does the a-localization of a smooth projective
variety X remember?
   The careful reader will have noticed that we switched from p-completing when dis-
cussing C to 2-completing when discussing R. The reason for this is that at an odd prime
the category SH(R)AipT admits the following simple description in terms of SH(C)AipT .
Proposition 1.32. There is an equivalence of categories
                             SH(R)AipT ' Spip ×SH(C)AipT × SH(C)AipT .
     This will be proven in Section 9.
1.4. Potpourri.
   In this subsection, we collect a number of additional results about the category of
Artin–Tate R-motivic spectra that are worth highlighting.
1.4.1. Trigraded R-motivic homology and Steenrod algebra. From a computational point
of view, an important first step in studying the trigraded homotopy groups of R-motivic
spectra is the computation of the trigraded homology of a point and the trigraded dual
Steenrod algebra. Leaning on known bigraded computations, we make these computa-
tions in Section 3.
Proposition 1.33. As trigraded commutative rings, with |t| = (0, 0, −1), there are
isomorphisms                                  
                           R
                          πp,q,w MZ2 ∼   C2
                                     = πp+qσ Z2 [t],
                                              
                           R
                          πp,q,w MF2 ∼   C2
                                     = πp+qσ F2 [t].
       C2           C2
Here, πp+qσ Z2 and πp+qσ F2 are placed in degrees (p, q, 0)
                                                                             C2
Remark 1.34. There are well-known elements τ ∈ π1,−1−1   R
                                                               MF2 and uσ ∈ π1−σ F2 .
Write u ∈ π1,−1,0 MF2 for the corresponding element. Then there is a relation (see
             R

Corollary 3.6)
                                       τ = t · u,
i.e.
                                      tau = ta · u.
This was the original motivation for our choice of the character t.
Proposition 1.35. The trigraded dual Steenrod algebra π∗,∗,∗
                                                       R
                                                             (MF2 ⊗ MF2 ) is isomor-
phic to
             (MF2 )∗∗∗ [τ0 , τ1 , · · · , ξ1 , ξ2 , · · · ]/(τi2 = t(aτi+1 + uξi+1 + aτ0 ξi+1 ))
Here, |τi | = (2i , 2i − 1, 2i − 1) and |ξi | = (2i − 1, 2i − 1, 2i − 1).
Remark 1.36. The reader may notice that the ‘negative cone’ in the C2 -equivariant
homology of a point appears in the above formulas. This is a feature of the Artin–Tate
category, as opposed to the Tate category.
   We expect that a computer could be coaxed into computing the MF2 -Adams spectral
sequence for the tri-graded homotopy of C t, and that the natural maps between this
spectral sequence and the MF2 -Adams spectral sequence for the tri-graded homotopy of
the sphere would provide many of the differentials in the latter. This technique would
likely be the most efficient way of computing both tri-graded R-motivic stems and (in the
long-run) the bi-graded C2 -equivariant homotopy groups. However, as the quad-graded
nature of this computation would begin to tax our ability to visualize data it is unlikely
that such a computation could be accomplished without the aid of a well-developed
software suite for manipulating spectral sequence data.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                             15


1.4.2. The effective slice filtration. In Section 4.2, we study Voevodsky’s effective slice
filtration. The effective slice filtration associates to any object E ∈ SH(k) a tower
                 · · · → f2 E → f1 E → f0 E → f−1 E → f−2 E → · · · → E.
The main result of the section is the following proposition, proven as Proposition 4.8
which identifies the Betti realization of this tower.
Proposition 1.37. The functor i∗ : SH(R)Ai2T → SpFil
                                                 C2 ,i2 sending E to the tower
                                 t                              t
· · · → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,1
                       2          → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,0
                             , E) −                2          → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,−1 , E) → . . .
                                                         , E) −
is equivalent to the functor Be ◦ f• : SH(R)Ai2T → SpFil
                                                     C2 ,i2 taking E ∈ SH(R)i2 to the
                                                                            AT

Betti realization of its effective slice tower.
Recollection 1.38. Voevodsky has defined the “rigid homotopy groups” [Voe02, Defi-
nition 5.1] of an R-motivic spectrum X to be
                                      R,rig
                                     πp,q,w X := πp,q,w
                                                  R
                                                        sw X,
where sw X is nth effective slice of X, i.e. the cofiber of fn+1 X → fn X.
   Using the notion of rigid homotopy groups, he observed the phenomenon of algebraic
degeneration in motivic homotopy theory. Since the associated graded of this tower
also computes the homotopy groups of X ⊗ C t, it follows from the proposition that
πp,q,w
 R,rig
       X ∼
         = πp,q,w
              R
                  X ⊗ C t when X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T . This shows that Voevodsky’s ideas
about algebraic degeneration line up with notions coming from the cofiber of t (or τ )
philosophy.
   The proposition also implies that the so-called C2 -effective spectral sequence (see
[Kon20]) is interchangeable with the t-Bockstein spectral sequence.
1.4.3. The functor νR . In Section 6.2, we will construct a lax symmetric monoidal func-
tor
                                 νR : SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T ,
which is a section of the Betti realization functor and sends Snρ     n,n,n
                                                                2 to S2     . This functor
is defined similarly to Pstragowski’s synthetic analog functor [Pst18, Definition 4.3].
Unlike the section cC/R of Heller–Ormsby, the functor νR is not exact. However, it is
better adapted to the construction of interesting R-motivic spectra, as the following
result shows.
Proposition 1.39. There are equivalences of commutative algebras,
       νR F2 ' MF2 ,          νR Z2 ' MZ2 ,           νR MUR,2 ' MGL2 ,
       νR kuR,2 ' kgl2 ,      νR koC2 ,2 ' kq2 .
   On the one hand, this proposition suggests that each of the 2-complete R-motivic
homology theories above is not particularly far from being purely topological. On the
other hand, it suggests that one may profitably define R-motivic analogs of 2-complete
C2 -equivariant homology theories by applying νR . For example, if we had a good defi-
nition of 2-complete C2 -equivariant connective topological modular forms tmf C2 ,2 , then
we could define a spectrum of R-motivic modular forms as νR tmf C2 ,2 . Unfortunately,
no such definition is currently known.
1.4.4. Further deformations. One of our motivations for this project was the hope that
a deformation-theoretic description of Artin–Tate R-motivic stable homotopy theory
would suggest other profitable deformations of classical stable homotopy theories.
    In Appendix C.1, we show how a 1-parameter deformation of a stable presentably
symmetric monoidal category C may be associated to a choice of object E ∈ C and
filtration {C≥k } of C. The case of SH(C)AipT is associated to the case where E = MUp ,
C = Spip and C≥k consists of the 2k-connective objects. The case of SH(R)Ai2T , on the
16               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


other hand, is associated to the case where E = MUR,2 , C = SpC2 ,i2 and C≥k consists of
the regular slice 2k-connective objects. Note that while the completions are necessary
for the link to motivic homotopy theory, for the purpose of studying classical homotopy
theory one may just as well work with integral deformations.
   This suggests several other deformations that may be profitable to study.
     (1) We can take the deformation of C2n -equivariant homotopy theory with respect
         to the norm NC  C2 MUR and the even slice filtration.
                          2n


     (2) At odd primes, one could try to construct the deformation associated to the
         hypothetical spectrum BPµp and the even regular slice filtration.
     (3) One could take the deformation of SpCp associated to Fp and the regular slice
         filtration. At the prime 2, this is connected to a variant of the F2 -Adams spectral
         sequence. Dylan Wilson has suggested that this variant may be more tractable
         at odd primes than the Fp -Adams spectral sequence, considering his forthcoming
         work with Krishanu Sankar proving that Fp ⊗ Fp is not a free Fp -module.
     (4) The deformation of SynMU based on ν Fp and an appropriately chosen filtration
         would likely shed much light on the motivic Adams spectral sequence over C.
         Such a category might be called a “bisynthetic”.

Notations and conventions.
   Throughout this paper the term category will refer to an ∞-category as developed
by Joyal and Lurie. In some places we use the term 1-category, which is short-hand for
1-truncated ∞-category. We will also assume the reader is familiar with higher algebra
as developed in [Lur17].
   Throughout this paper, filtered and graded objects will be ubiquitous. We adopt the
convention that a filtered object in a category C is a diagram of the form
                       · · · → C2 → C1 → C0 → C−1 → C−2 → · · · ,
i.e. that the maps decrease the index variable. We provide a more complete introduc-
tion to filtered objects in Appendix B, where we set up notation for several standard
constructions.
    Let C denote a stable, presentably symmetric monoidal category. We will let Cp
denote the category of p-complete objects in C; this category acquires a symmetric
monoidal structure through the completion of the symmetric monoidal structure on C.
Similarly, if X is an an object of C, we let Xp denote the p-completion of X. If C
has a set of compact generators, then we let Cip denote the ind-completion of the full
subcategory of C generated under finite colimits and retracts by the p-completions of
compact objects. In the situation where the unit is compact and all compact objects are
dualizable, this definition admits the following simplification: Cip ' Mod(C; 1p ). The
tensor product can then be described as the relative tensor product over 1p . The reason
for this equivalence is that tensoring with a dualizable object commutes with limits, so
for X dualizable Xp ' X ⊗ 1p .
    Our reason for using Cip over Cp is that, even if the unit in C is compact, the unit
in Cp may not be compact. On the other hand, compactness of the unit in C implies
compactness of the unit in Cip . This will make certain arguments more direct in the ip
case. The reader who strongly prefers the usual notion of p-completion will be relieved
to know that in convenient cases (such as those in which we work throughout this paper)
(Cip )p ' Cp . Therefore, all the main theorems above admit p-complete analogs.
    When C is a stable category and X, Y ∈ C are objects, we will typically let MapC (X, Y )
denote the spectrum of maps from X to Y . One exception is when C comes with a
natural enrichment to C2 -spectra, such as when C = SH(R). In that case, we will
regard MapC (X, Y ) as a C2 -spectrum. When we want to access the underlying space of
maps, we shall use the notation Ω∞ MapC (X, Y ).
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                        17


Acknowledgements.
  We thank Tom Bachmann, Mark Behrens, Dan Isaksen, Piotr Pstrągowski and Zhouli
Xu for helpful conversations. During the course of this work, the middle author was
supported by NSF grant DMS-1803273, and the last author by an NSF GRFP fellowship
under Grant No. 1745302.

                             2. Constructing the element ta
   The map τ and its properties are the most striking feature of the category of p-
complete motives over C. In this section we construct a map t which plays the role of
τ over R and verify its basic property: its Betti realization is 1.
Theorem 2.1. For all primes p, there is a class t ∈ π0,0,−1
                                                     R
                                                            Sp with the following
properties:
    (1) Under Betti realization, t goes to 1 ∈ π0C2 Sp .
    (2) Under base change to C, t goes to τ ∈ π0,−1
                                                  C
                                                       Sp .
   Surprisingly, as with the element τ in previous work, we will not need to use any
information about the construction of t besides properties (1) and (2) outside this
section. Since the construction of t will be completely analogous to the construction of
τ over C, we begin by recalling that construction. The construction below is inspired
by [HKO11b, Remark on p. 22] and [BEØ20, Section 4].

2.1. Constructing τ over C.
   We begin by fixing a compatible sequence of primitive (pk )th roots of unity {ζpk }k≥0 .
We may then construct the following diagram of varieties over C
                                  `
                          Spec(C) Spec(C)           Spec(C)
                                              (ζpk ,1)                            1
                                                               [pk ]
                                             Gm                               Gm .
After passing to the associated diagram of motivic spaces we can add a third column by
taking cofibers:
                                                               S1
                           `
                   Spec(C) Spec(C)          Spec(C)
                                  (ζpk ,1)                             1                     τk

                                                  [pk ]
                               Gm                                 Gm                  Gm /[pk ].
Using the compatibility of the chosen primitive (pk )th roots of unity, the maps τk so
defined are compatible in the sense that there are commutative diagrams
                                                          id
                                        S1                             S1
                                             τk                            τk−1

                                    Gm /[pk ]                   Gm /[pk−1 ].
  Stabilizing and using the fact that Σ∞ [pk ] : S1,1 → S1,1 is equivalent to pk over C,16
we find that we have constructed a compatible system of elements τk ∈ π0,−1     C
                                                                                    S /pk .
Passing to the limit, we obtain the element τ ∈ π0,−1 Sp .
                                                   C


Proposition 2.2. For some choice of {ζpk }k≥0 , we have Be(τ ) = 1. 17

  16This follows from Corollary 1.21, since the Betti realization of [pk ] is clearly pk .
  17It seems likely that the choice of roots of unity which yields 1 is exp
                                                                                                  
                                                                                             2πi
                                                                                             pk
                                                                                                       .
18                  ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Proof. We will show that Be(τ ) ∈ π0 Sp = Zp is a p-adic unit. Then, using the action of
Aut(µp∞ ) = Z×  p on systems of (p )    roots of unity, we may change τ by multiplication
                                   k th

by any p-adic unit.
   It now suffices to show that the Betti realizations of the unstable maps τk : S 1 →
Gm /[pk ] are surjective on π1 . Since [pk ] : C× → C× is a principal µpk -fibration, it is
classified by a map C× → Bµpk and we can form the following diagram:

                          S0           S0                 ∗            S1
                           (ζpk ,1)         (ζpk ,1)
                                                 [pk ]
                         µpk           C×                C×         C× /[pk ]


                                                         Bµpk

   The dashed map C× /[pk ] → Bµpk is an isomorphism on π1 after Betti realization,
so it suffices to show that the composite map S 1 → C× /[pk ] → Bµpk is surjective on
Betti-realized π1 . This follows from the fact that the map S 1 → Bµpk is adjoint to the
         (ζpk ,1)
map S 0 −−−−→ µpk .                                                                        
2.2. Constructing t over R.
   We now imitate the construction of τ above to construct t and prove Theorem 2.1.
The key point is that there are two forms of Gm over R. While the roots of unity ζn do
not lie in
                             {±1} ⊂ Gm (R) ⊆ Gm (C) = C× ,
the other form of Gm over R (which is the “algebraic circle”, Q, given by {x2 + y 2 = 1})
has
                           S 1 = Q(R) ⊆ Q(C) ∼ = Gm (C) = C× .
As such, we are free to imitate the construction of τ above with Gm replaced by the
algebraic circle Q.
   Let {ζpk }k≥0 be the system of primitive (pk )th roots of unity satisfying the conclusion
of Proposition 2.2. As before, we form the diagram of R-motivic spaces:
                                                                   S1
                             `
                    Spec(R) Spec(R)            Spec(R)
                                 (ζpk ,1)                       1               tk
                                                k
                                              [p ]
                               Q                              Q         Q/[pk ].
Before finishing the construction and proving Theorem 2.1 we need a short lemma which
identifies the map [pk ].
Lemma 2.3. The map Σ∞ [pk ] : S1,0,1 → S1,0,1 is homotopic to pk : S1,0,1 → S1,0,1 .
Proof. Since the map π0,0,0
                          R
                              → π0C2 induced by Betti realization is an isomorphism by
Corollary 1.21, it suffices to show this after Betti realization. Upon Betti realization,
this is a map S1 → S1 which induces multiplication by pk on both geometric fixed points
and on the underlying spectrum. The map π0C2 → Z⊕Z given by (underlying, geometric
fixed points) is injective.                                                            
Proof of Theorem 2.1. Stabilizing and applying Lemma 2.3, we obtain a compatible
system of classes tk ∈ π0,0,−1
                           R
                                 S /pk which give rise to a class t ∈ π0,0,−1
                                                                       R
                                                                              Sp . It follows
immediately from the definition that the base change of t to C is τ . Since the Betti
realization of τ is 1, we find that the underlying of the Betti realization of t is 1.
   In order to show that the Betti realization of t is 1, it therefore suffices to show
that it is multiplication by some p-adic integer. To do this, it suffices to do so modulo
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                 19


pk for all k. Modulo pk , the Betti realization of t arises as the stabilization of a map
S 1 → S 1 /pk of C2 -equivariant spaces, and all such maps are given by multiplication by
a p-adic integer.                                                                       

                                  3. The ta-local category
  In this section, we show that Betti realization identifies the category of t-local Artin-
Tate R-motivic spectra with the category of C2 -spectra. Indeed, we know from Theo-
rem 2.1 that Be(t) = 1, so that Be factors through the category of t-local objects. The
main theorem of this section is that the induced functor is an equivalence.
Definition 3.1. Let S2 [t−1 ] denote the commutative algebra given by
                                           t        t         t
                                                                    
                 S2 [t−1 ] := colim S0,0,0
                                      2    → S0,0,1
                                              2     → S20,0,2 → · · · .
The category of modules over S2 [t−1 ] in SH(R)Ai2T is equivalent to the catgoery of t-
local objects in SH(R)Ai2T .18 Since the Betti realization of t is 1, Betti realization factors
through t-localization providing a symmetric monoidal functor
                            Be : Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [t−1 ]) → SpC2 ,i2 .
Theorem 3.2. Betti realization induces an equivalence of symmetric monoidal cate-
gories
                                                          '
                          Be : Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [t−1 ]) −
                                                          → SpC2 ,i2
with inverse equivalence given by Y (−) := cC/R (−)[t−1 ]. Simply put, inverting t in
SH(R)Ai2T recovers SpC2 ,i2 .
   The main step in our proof of this theorem is showing that Y is fully-faithful. Since
cC/R is fully-faithful, as proved by Heller and Ormsby (see Theorem 1.20), this reduces to
studying the interaction of t and cC/R . Our method of proof is to prove the appropriate
statement at the level of MF2 by direct computation, extend to dualizable objects by
descent, then extend to all objects by colimits. This stategy requires knowledge of the
tri-graded homology of a point and the strucutre of the tri-graded dual Steenrod algebra
as an input. Since this is of independent interest we have separated it out as its own
subsection.
3.1. The homology of a point.
   In this subsection we compute the tri-graded homology of a point and the structure
of the dual Steenrod algebra. Although we only use coarse information extracted from
these computations in this paper, we hope that they are useful to readers more interested
in computations. The reader who has heard that R-motivic computations are simplified
by the absence of the “negative cone” may be surprised to learn that it is present in the
tri-graded picture.
Proposition 3.3. As tri-graded commutative rings, with |t| = (0, 0, −1), there are
isomorphisms
                                                               
           R
          πp,q,w MZ2 ∼   C2
                     = πp+qσ                 R
                             Z2 [t] and πp,q,w   MF2 ∼     C2
                                                      = πp+qσ  F2 [t],
       C2           C2
where πp+qσ Z2 and πp+qσ F2 are each placed in tri-degree (p, q, 0).
   Before we move on to the proof of Proposition 3.3, we remind the reader of the
              C2           C2
structure of πp+qσ Z2 and πp+qσ F2 . We also explain how to translate between the older
names of elements in the bi-graded homology of a point and the names arising from this
proposition.
   18Here we use the fact that one may invert an element in the Picard-graded homotopy of a commu-
tative algebra and the associated description of the module category as a localization from the proof of
[Lur18a, Proposition 4.3.17].
20              ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER

                         The C2 -equivariant F2 -homology of a point



                     4



                     2
                                               θ

                                                            1
                     0

                                                       aσ           uσ

                   −2




                                 −4           −2            0            2

        Figure 1. The bigraded homotopy groups of F2 depicted on a (p, q) coordinate
        system. Vertical lines going down denote multiplication by aσ . Diagonal lines going
        down-right denote multiplication by uσ .


Recollection 3.4. The bi-graded homotopy groups of F2 are given by
                                                                   
                    C2      ∼                         θ
                   πp+qσ F2 = F2 [aσ , uσ ] ⊕ F2           |k, n ≥ 0 ,
                                                   akσ unσ
where |aσ | = −σ, |uσ | = 1 − σ, and |θ| = 2σ − 2. The multiplicative structure is that
of a trivial square-zero extension over F2 [aσ , uσ ]: more informally, it is given by θ2 = 0.
This is pictured in Figure 1.
   The bi-graded homotopy groups of Z2 are given by
                                                                                   
          C2      ∼                               2                     θ
         πp+qσ Z2 = Z2 [aσ , u2σ ]/(2aσ ) ⊕ Z2        |n ≥ 1 ⊕ F2            |k, n ≥ 0
                                                 un2σ               akσ un2σ
where |aσ | = −σ, |u2σ | = 2 − 2σ, and |θ| = 3σ − 3. Again, the term involving θ sits in
a trivial square-zero extension with rest of the ring. This is pictured in Figure 2.

Recollection 3.5. Under Betti realization, MZ2 and MF2 are sent to Z2 and F2 [HO16].
The following are some commonly encountered homotopy elements and their Betti re-
alizations:
                                                                                        C2
      • Stabilizing the inclusion of the fixed points S 0 → S σ , we obtain aσ ∈ π−σ       S.
         This class maps to the corresponding class in Z2 and F2 .
                                                                                 C2
      • We let u ∈ π1,−1,0
                     R
                           MF2 denote the element corresponding to uσ ∈ π1−σ        F2 under
         the isomorphism of Proposition 3.3.
      • The class ρ ∈ π0,−1,−1
                       R
                               S is defined to be the stabilization of the inclusion {±1} ,→
         Gm . Under Betti realization, ρ goes to aσ .
      • The element τ ∈ π1,−1,−1
                           R
                                  MF2 corresponds to −1 under the isomorphism π1,−1,−1R
                                                                                              MF2 ∼
                                                                                                  =
         µ2 (R). Under Betti realization, τ goes to uσ .
Corollary 3.6. There are relations ρ = t · a in π0,−1,−1
                                                 R
                                                         S2 and τ = t · u ∈ π1,−1,−1
                                                                             R
                                                                                     MF2 .
                 GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                              21

                       The C2 -equivariant integral homology of a point



             6



             4

                                                   θ
                                                             2
             2                                              u2σ



                                                                       1
             0

                                                                  aσ

            −2                                                                      u2σ



            −4

                          −6            −4             −2              0        2             4

         Figure 2. The bigraded homotopy groups of Z2 depicted on a (p, q) coordinate
         system. Squares denote copies of Z2 and circles denotes copies of F2 . Vertical lines
         going down denote multiplication by aσ . Diagonal lines going down-right denote
         multiplication by u2σ . The red line indicates a u2σ multiplication that hits twice a
         generator. Not all u2σ multiplications are shown.


Proof. In Lemma 3.12, we will show that Betti realization induces an isomorphism
                C2
π0,−1,−1
 R
         S2 → π−σ  S2 , therefore for the first relation it suffices to note that Be(ρ) =
1 · aσ = Be(t · a). Similarly, by Proposition 3.3 and Recollection 3.4, we know that
π1,−1,−1
 R
         MF2 ∼
             = F2 {t · u}. Since Be(τ ) = uσ 6= 0, the second relation follows.         
  Assuming the tri-graded homology of a point, the tri-graded dual Steenrod algebra
can easily by deduced from results of Voevodsky.
Theorem 3.7. The tri-graded R-motivic dual Steenrod algebra π∗,∗,∗
                                                             R
                                                                   (MF2 ⊗ MF2 ) is
isomorphic to
           (MF2 )∗,∗,∗ [τ0 , τ1 , · · · , ξ1 , ξ2 , · · · ]/(τi2 = taτi+1 + tuξi+1 + taτ0 ξi+1 ),
where |τi | = (2i , 2i − 1, 2i − 1) and |ξi | = (2i − 1, 2i − 1, 2i − 1).
Proof. We will deduce this from the classical bigraded computation of the R-motivic
Steenrod algebra. The key input is the fact that MF2 ⊗ MF2 decomposes as a direct
sum of R-motivic spectra of the form Σp,q,q MF2 . This is stated as [HKØ17, Theorem
1.1 (3)], which in the case of a characteristic zero base field such as R follows from work
of Voevodsky [Voe03b, Voe10].
   The decomposition of MF2 ⊗ MF2 given in [HKØ17, Theorem 1.1] shows that, as a
(MF2 )∗,∗,∗ -module, π∗,∗,∗
                       R
                            (MF2 ⊗ MF2 ) is freely generated by monomials in the ξi and
22               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


τi . Since each τi and ξi is represented by a map of the form Sa ⊗Gbm → MF2 ⊗ MF2
(with no copies of SC in the domain), we may read off the formulas for products of τi
and ξi from the standard bigraded computations [Voe03b, Theorem 12.6]. To translate
the formulas into tri-graded notation, we need only make use of the relations ρ = t · a
and τ = t · u of Corollary 3.6.                                                      

   We now proceed to the proof of Proposition 3.3. The main steps of the proof are
split across the next several lemmas, the key input being our knowledge of the bigraded
2-complete motivic cohomology of both R and C.
Lemma 3.8. For integers p, w ∈ Z, there are isomorphisms
                              R
                             πp,w,w MZ2 ∼
                                        = Z2 [τ 2 , ρ]/(2ρ).
For integers p, q, w ∈ Z, there are isomorphisms
                         R
                        πp,q,w (Spec(C) ⊗ MZ2 ) ∼  C
                                                = πp+q,w (MZ2 )
and
                                   C
                                  πp,w MZ2 ∼
                                           = Z2 [τ ].
Proof. The base change isomorphism is a corollary of the six functor formalism. The
computations of motivic cohomology are a corollary of Voevodsky’s solution of the
Bloch–Kato and Beilinson–Lichtenbaum conjectures [Voe03a].                       

Lemma 3.9. The groups πp,q,w
                       R
                             MZ2 and πp,q,w
                                      R
                                            MF2 are zero for w > 0.
                                                   2
Proof. Considering the cofiber sequence MZ2 −    → MZ2 → MF2 , we reduce to the case
of MZ2 . Using Lemma 3.8, we see that this lemma is true for tri-degrees of the form
(p, w, w). For each integer n, consider the cofiber sequence
                      Spec(C) ⊗ (SC )⊗n−1 → (SC )⊗n−1 → (SC )⊗n .
Tensoring this with MZ2 and applying πp,w,w , we obtain a long exact sequence
          C
         πp+w−n+1,w MZ2 → πp,w−n+1,w
                           R
                                     MZ2 → πp,w−n,w
                                            R
                                                    MZ2 → πp+w−n,w
                                                           C
                                                                   MZ2 .
   When w > 0, Lemma 3.8 thus ensures an isomorphism between πp,w−n+1,w
                                                                  R
                                                                           MZ2 and
πp,w−n,w
 R
         MZ2 . As n varies, using the base case n = 0, we conclude that these groups
always vanish.                                                                    
                                                                 C2
Lemma 3.10. When w ≤ 0, the Betti realization maps πp,q,w
                                                    R
                                                          MZ2 → πp+qσ Z2 and
              C
πp,q,w
 R
       MF2 → πp+qσ
               2
                   F2 are isomorphisms.
                                               2
Proof. Considering the cofiber sequence MZ2 −→ MZ2 → MF2 , we reduce to the case of
MZ2 . We first check that this true when w = q. Recollection 3.4, Recollection 3.5 and
Lemma 3.8 imply that the Betti realization map is an isomorphism for degrees of the
form (p, w, w) with w ≤ 0. As in the previous lemma we tensor the cofiber sequence
                      Spec(C) ⊗ (SC )⊗n−1 → (SC )⊗n−1 → (SC )⊗n
with MZ2 and take homotopy groups in order to spread out to other cases. Using β as
notation for Betti realization we obtain maps of of exact sequences of abelian groups

     πp+w−n+1,w
      C
                MZ2       πp,w−n+1,w
                           R
                                     MZ2               πp,w−n,w
                                                        R
                                                                MZ2   πp+w−n,w
                                                                       C
                                                                               MZ2
            ∼
            =                      βp,n−1                    βp,n             ∼
                                                                              =
                            C2                          C2
      πp+w−n+1 Z2          πp+(w−n+1)σ Z2              πp+(w−n)σ Z2     πp+w−n Z2 ,
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                           23


with our goal being to prove that the Betti realization maps βp,n are isomorphisms for
all p, n ∈ Z.
   Using the 5-lemma we conclude that (βp,n−1 is iso) + (βp−1,n−1 is iso) implies (βp,n
is iso). Similarly, the 5-lemma also implies that (βp,n is iso) + (βp+1,n is iso) implies
(βp,n−1 is iso). As noted above, we have already learned that βp,0 is an isomorphism for
all p, so we may now induct outwards from this case to conclude.                       
Proof of Proposition 3.3. By Lemma 3.10, the map
                                                 C2
                                    R
                                   πp,q,0 MZ2 → πp+qσ Z2 ,
induced by Betti realization is an isomorphism. Taking the inverse, we obtain a ring
map
                                  C2
                                πp+qσ Z2 → πp,q,0
                                             R
                                                  MZ2 .
This extends to a ring map
                                      
                                C2
                               πp+qσ Z2 [t] → πp,q,∗ MZ2 .
It follows from Theorem 2.1 and Lemmas 3.9 and 3.10 that this map is an isomorphism.
The same proof works for MF2 .                                                    
3.2. The proof of Theorem 3.2.
    Recall that we are proving that Be is an equivalence on the t-local category with
inverse Y . We will check directly that Y is an equivalence of categories by showing that
it is fully faithful and essentially surjective. That Be is the inverse of Y follows from the
fact that Be ◦ Y = Be ◦ cC/R is the identity on SpC2 ,i2 . Before we can make progress on
this goal we will need a pair of lemmas.
Lemma 3.11. The tri-graded homotopy of C t is zero in negative weights.
Proof. Our method of proof will be to apply the motivic Adams spectral sequence to C t.
Since this spectral sequence converges strongly for S2 by [HKO11a], it also converges
strongly for C t. This spectral sequence takes the form
                       E1s,t = πt,q,w (C t ⊗ MF⊗s+1
                                               2    )=⇒πt−s,q,w C t.
It suffices therefore to check at the level of the E1 -page that πt,q,w MF2⊗s+1 = 0 for w < 0.
    For this, we use the known [Voe03b, Voe10, HKØ17] description of MF2 ⊗ MF2 in
SH(R). One has that MF2 ⊗ MF2 ' ⊕(xi ,yi ,yi ) Σxi ,yi ,yi MF2 , where the xi and yi range
over non-negative integers. The result now follows immediately from Proposition 3.3. 
Lemma 3.12. Let n denote a non-negative integer. Given a pair of C2 -spectra X, Y ∈
SpC2 ,i2 , the natural map induced by tn
           MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R X, cC/R Y ) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R X, S20,0,n ⊗cC/R Y )
is an equivalence.
Proof. Since cC/R commutes with colimits it will suffice to prove the proposition as X
ranges through a family of compact generators of SpC2 ,i2 . In particular, it will suffice
to assume X ' S2p+qσ is a representation sphere. Since cC/R X ' Sp,q,0
                                                                     2    is compact, it
furthermore suffices to prove the proposition as Y ranges through a family of compact
generators. In particular, it suffices to assume that Y ' Sa+bσ
                                                           2    is also a representation
sphere.
   At this point, the proposition reduces to a claim about
      MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R Sp+qσ
                          2    , S0,0,n
                                  2     ⊗cC/R Sa+bσ
                                               2    ) ' MapSH(R)Ai2T (S2p−a,q−b,−n , S2 ),
or in other words a claim about the tri-graded stable stems π∗,∗,∗
                                                             R
                                                                   S2 . We must show that
multiplication by t is an isomorphism π∗,∗,0 S2 → π∗,∗,−n S2 . Equivalently, we must
                    n                       R           R
24                  ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


check that t : π∗,∗,−n
                R
                       S2 → π∗,∗,−n−1
                             R
                                      S2 is an isomorphism for each n ≥ 0. Examining
the cofiber sequence
                                                           t
                                  Σ−1,0,0 C t → S20,0,−1 → S2 → C t,
we may use Lemma 3.11 to conclude.                                                                     

  We are now ready to complete the proof of Theorem 3.2.
  To check that Y is fully faithful, we must prove that for any pair A, B ∈ SpC2 ,i2 the
composite
MapSpC ,i2 (A, B) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R A, cC/R B) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R A[t−1 ], cC/R B[t−1 ])
          2

is an equivalence. The first map is an equivalence as a consequence of the fully-
faithfulness of cC/R as proven by Heller-Ormsby, see Theorem 1.20. The second map
factors as
                                               '
                                            → MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R A, cC/R B[t−1 ])
              MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R A, cC/R B) −
                                               '
                                              → MapSH(R)Ai2T (cC/R A[t−1 ], cC/R B[t−1 ])
                                              −
where first map is an equivalence as a consequence of Lemma 3.12 and the second map
is an equivalence since inverting t is a localization.
   Since Y is now fully-faithful and colimit preserving, to check that it is essentially
surjective it suffices to check that its image contains a family of compact generators.
One such family consists of the objects Sp,q,w2   [t−1 ] as p, q, w range over the integers,
       p,q,w −1        p,q,0 −1       p+qσ
since S2    [t ] ' S2 [t ] ' Y (S2         ).

                                    4. Galois reconstruction
    In this section, we provide a Galois reconstruction of SH(R)Ai2T . In other words, we
show how to reconstruct SH(R)Ai2T from C2 -equivariant homotopy theory. As in the case
of C, understanding the close connection between MGL and its Betti realization is the
essential step in reconstruction. In Appendix C, we have set up a general framework
for reconstruction results of this kind. We will rely heavily on the work there, so we
suggest the reader familiarize themself with the material and notations therein before
proceeding.
    Before we state the main theorem, let us recall the definition of the regular slice
filtration of C2 -spectra.
Definition 4.1. We say that a C2 -spectrum X is regular slice n-connective if Φe X is
n-connective and ΦC2 X is d n2 e-connective.19
   We let Sp≥n
             C2 denote the full subcategory of SpC2 consisting of the regular slice n-
connective C2 -spectra. This is a coreflective subcategory, and we let Pn : SpC2 →
Sp≥n
   C2 denote the right adjoint to the inclusion. We let P denote the n
                                                         n             th
                                                                          regular slice
truncation functor and let Pn denote the n regular slice functor.
                             n               th


Construction 4.2. Since the functors Φe and ΦC2 are monoidal, the hypotheses of Con-
struction C.6 are satisfied and we may assemble the categories Sp≥n     C2 into a coreflective
                                       Fil,2slice
symmetric monoidal subcategory SpC2 ,≥0 ⊂ SpC2 which consists of those X• which
                                                     Fil

are regular slice 2n-connective in position n. This provides a lax symmetric monoidal
connective cover functor τ≥0
                           2slice
                                  which takes the (2n)th -slice cover at position n. The com-
position τ≥0 (Y (−)) is equivalent to even slice tower functor P2• and demonstrates that
          2slice

this functor is lax symmetric monoidal.

     19Here we work with the regular slice filtration because of its good multiplicative properties.
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                              25


    The fundamental construction of the section is the following commutative algebra in
filtered C2 -spectra:
                                                       
                             R• := Tot∗ P2• MU⊗∗+1 R,2    .

Theorem 4.3 (Galois reconstruction). There is an equivalence of presentably symmetric
monoidal categories under SpFil
                            C2 ,i2 ,

                               SH(R)Ai2T ' Mod(SpFil
                                                 C2 ,i2 ; R• ),

where SpC2 ,i2 acts on the left through cC/R .
   The commutative algebra R• can be called the “décalage of the MUR,2 -Adams tower
with respect to the even slice filtration”. The commutative algebra R• is also the image
of the unit in SpC2 ,i2 under a certain lax symmetric monoidal functor.
Construction 4.4. Applying Construction C.9, we obtain a lax symmetric monoidal
functor
                     Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 ) : SpC2 ,i2 → SpFil
                                                     C2 ,i2 .

By construction, R• ' Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(S2 ), so this functor factors through the category
of modules over R• . Composing with the equivalence of Theorem 4.3, this defines a lax
symmetric monoidal functor,
                                  Γ∗ : SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T .
   This functor is analogous to the functor Γ∗ : Sp2 → SH(C)2 studied in [GIKR18],
and may also be compared with the synthetic analogue functor of Pstragowski [Pst18].
We will study this functor more closely in Section 6.
   The proof of Theorem 4.3 will be carried out in two steps: first we will prove that
there is an equivalence
                           SH(R)Ai2T ' Mod(SpFilC2 ,i2 ; i∗ (S2 ))

for some lax symmetric monoidal functor i∗ : SH(R)Ai2T → SpFil    C2 ,i2 . We will then con-
struct an equivalence i∗ (S2 ) ' R• of commutative rings in SpFil  C2 ,i2 . The key step in
the construction of this equivalence is the identification of i∗ (MGL2 ) as a commutative
              C2 ,i2 . In order make this identification, we will show that i∗ admits a
algebra in SpFil
description in terms of Voevodsky’s effective slice filtration.

4.1. The filtered model.
   In this subsection we prove the first half of Galois reconstruction, namely that there
is a filtered model for SH(R)Ai2T .
Proposition 4.5. There is a diagram of symmetric monoidal left adjoints
                                         −⊗i∗ S                                 Re
             SpC2 ,i2        SpFil
                               C2 ,i2             Mod(SpFil
                                                        C2 ,i2 ; i∗ S2 )             SpC2 ,i2
                                                  i∗
                 Id                                          '                           Id
                                  cC/R                                     Be
             SpC2 ,i2                                  SH(R)i2   AT
                                                                                     SpC2 ,i2

such that i∗ (Sp+qσ
               2    (w)) ' Sp,q,w
                            2     .
   Note that Proposition C.20 produces a diagram of this type, so in order to prove
the proposition we only need to endow SH(R)Ai2T and SpC2 ,i2 with the structure of a
deformation pair in the sense of Definition C.14.

Proof. We begin with the diagram
26                ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                                             SH(R)Ai2T
                                      cC/R               Be

                                                Id
                           SpC2 ,i2                           SpC2 ,i2 .

In order to make i∗ behave as desired on Picard elements, we pick i0 (w) = S0,0,w
                                                                              2   . Since
     0,0,w      0
Be(S2      ) ' S2 , this factors through the kernel of the map on Picard groups induced
by Be.
   To conclude, we now need to verify the two conditions in the definition of a deforma-
tion pair. The first condition is implied by Lemma 3.12. To verify the second condition,
we note that the representation spheres S2p+qσ form a set of compact dualizable gen-
erators for SpC2 ,i2 and the tri-graded spheres Sp,q,w
                                                   2     form a set of compact dualizable
generators for SH(R)Ai2T .                                                             

Remark 4.6. Unraveling the definitions in Appendix C, we find that for X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T
there is a natural identification
                              i∗ (X)n ' MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                       2     , X),
and that the natural maps
         MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                        2     , X) ' i∗ (X)n → i∗ (X)n−1 ' MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n−1
                                                                          2       , X)

are induced by t : S0,0,n−1
                    2       → S0,0,n
                               2     .
     The task of identifying i∗ S2 with R• will occupy us for the remainder of the section.

4.2. The effective slice filtration.
    In this section, we relate the functor i∗ defined in the previous subsection to Voevod-
sky’s effective slice filtration. We begin by recalling the definition of the effective slice
filtration [Voe02].
Definition 4.7. Let Sm/R denote the category of smooth and separated R-schemes of
finite type. We let SH(R)eff
                           i2,≥n ⊂ SH(R)i2 denote the full subcategory generated under
small colimits by the collection {Sp,q,q
                                     2    ⊗X+ |X ∈ Sm/R, p, q ∈ Z, q ≥ n}. We denote
the right adjoint of the inclusion by fn : SH(R)i2 → SH(R)eff  i2,≥n . There are natural
transformations fn+1 → fn and we let sn denote the cofiber of this map.
   Since SH(R)eff
                i2,≥n ⊂ SH(R)i2 is a compactly generated stable subcategory, the func-
tors fn and sn preserve all colimits. Moreover, the tensor product of an n-effective
object with an m-effective object is (m + n)-effective, so that the effective slice tower
functor f• : SH(R)i2 → SH(R)Fil  i2 is lax symmetric monoidal.

     The main result of this section is the following:
Proposition 4.8. The lax symmetric monoidal functor i∗ : SH(R)Ai2T → SpFil      C2 ,i2 of
the previous subsection is equivalent to the lax symmetric monoidal functor Be ◦ f• :
SH(R)Ai2T → SpFil
               C2 ,i2 taking E ∈ SH(R)i2 to the Betti realization of its effective slice
                                         AT

tower
         · · · → Be(f2 E) → Be(f1 E) → Be(f0 E) → Be(f−1 E) → Be(f−2 E) → . . . .
     As a first step, we rephrase Definition 4.7 to be more natural in our trigraded context:
Lemma 4.9. The full subcategory SH(R)eff  i2,≥n ⊂ SH(R)i2 is generated under small col-
                          p,q,w
imits by the collection {S2     ⊗X+ |X ∈ Sm/R, p, q, w ∈ Z, w ≥ n}. As a consequence,
the suspension functors provide equivalences,
                           Σp,q,w : SH(R)eff          eff
                                         i2,≥n → SH(R)i2,≥n+w .
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                             27


Proof. Since Σ0,1,1 : SH(R)eff  i2,≥n → SH(R)i2,≥n+1 is clearly an equivalence of categories,
                                                eff

it suffices to prove the generation statement in the case that n = 0. Since SH(R)eff          i2,≥0
is closed under tensor products, it suffices to show that S20,−1,0 ∈ SH(R)eff      i2,≥0 .
   Now, SH(R)eff   i2,≥0 is clearly closed under Σ
                                                    −1,0,0
                                                           , so it suffices to show that S21,−1,0 ∈
SH(R)eff i2,≥0 . This follows from the existence of a cofiber sequence

                                  S0,0,0 → Spec C → S1,−1,0 .
The second statement is a clear consequence of the generation statement.                        
   We now define an alternative filtration on SH(R)Ai2T which is easier to analyze; follow-
ing an argument of Heard [Hea19], itself an adaptation of an argument of Pelaez [Pel13],
we will prove that this filtration is in fact equivalent to the effective slice filtration.
                                   T,AT−eff
Definition 4.10. We let SH(R)Ai2,≥n          denote the full subcategory generated under
                                   p,q,w
small colimits by the collection {S2     |p, q, w ∈ Z, w ≥ n}. We let
                                                        T,AT−eff
                              fnAT : SH(R)Ai2T → SH(R)Ai2,≥n
denote the right adjoint of the inclusion. There are natural transformations fn+1
                                                                              AT
                                                                                  → fnAT ,
and we denote the cofiber by sn .AT

                 T,AT−eff
   Since SH(R)Ai2,≥n      ⊂ SH(R)Ai2T is a compactly generated stable subcategory, the
functors fn and sn preserve colimits.
          AT        AT


                           T,AT−eff
   It is clear that SH(R)Ai2,≥n                        i2,≥n .
                                    ⊂ SH(R)Ai2T ∩ SH(R)eff
Lemma 4.11. Given E ∈ SH(R)i2 , there are natural equivalences fk Σp,q,w E ' Σp,q,w fk−w E
and sk Σp,q,w E ' Σp,q,w sk−w E. If E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T , the analagous fact holds for fkAT and
sAT
 k .

Proof. This follows directly from the fact that Σp,q,w : SH(R)eff              eff
                                                                 i2,≥k → SH(R)i2,≥k+w
                    T,AT−eff          T,AT−eff
and Σp,q,w : SH(R)Ai2,≥k     → SH(R)Ai2,≥k+w   are equivalences of categories.      
Lemma 4.12. Given E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T , there are natural equivalences fn E ' fnAT E for all
n ∈ Z.
                                                                               AT,AT−eff
Proof. It is easy to see that the categories SH(R)eff
                                                    i2,≥n ⊂ SH(R)i2 and SH(R)i2,≥n       ⊂
SH(R)Ai2T define slice filtrations in the sense of [Hea19, Definition 2.1]. The result will
therefore follow from [Hea19, Theorem 2.20] if we can verify three conditions. Let
ι : SH(R)Ai2T ,→ SH(R)i2 denote the inclusion. Then we must show that the following
hold for all E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T :
     (1) The natural map limn ι(fnAT E) → ι(limn fnAT E)) is an equivalence.
                             −→                −→
     (2) ι(fnAT E) ∈ SH(R)eff
                            i2,≥n .
     (3) MapSH(R)i2 (X, ι(sA n E)) ' 0 for all X ∈ SH(R)i2,≥n+1 .
                              T                            eff

Condition (1) is clear from the fact that SH(R)Ai2T is closed under colimits in SH(R)i2 ,
                                                        T,AT−eff
and condition (2) follows from the fact that SH(R)Ai2,≥n                   i2,≥n .
                                                                  ⊂ SH(R)eff
   To prove condition (3), we note that, since sn commutes with filtered colimits and
                                                    AT

SH(R)effi2,≥n+1 is compactly generated, it suffices to prove the statement for generators
            T,AT−eff
of SH(R)Ai2,≥n       , namely the trigraded spheres Sp,q,w
                                                      2     where w ≥ n. Since sA   T p,q,w
                                                                                   n S2     '
               0,0,0                                                 0,0,0
Σ p,q,w AT
       sn−w S2       by Lemma 4.11, it suffices to show this for S2 .
                                          T 0,0,0
   This follows from the equivalence sA  n S2     ' sn S20,0,0 , which may be proved exactly
as in [Hea19, Theorem 3.15].                                                                
   We are now free to use fn and fnAT interchangeably. The following proposition gives
us the needed control over fnAT :
28               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER

                                                      T,AT−eff
Proposition 4.13. Let E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T . Then E ∈ SH(R)Ai2,≥n     if and only if
                                       R
                                      πp,q,w (C t ⊗ E) = 0
for all w < n, i.e. if and only if t : πp,q,w+1
                                        R
                                                E → πp,q,w
                                                     R
                                                           E is an isomorphism for all
w < n.
                                                                         T,AT−eff
Proof. To show that πp,q,wR
                               (C t ⊗ E) = 0 for all w < n if E ∈ SH(R)Ai2,≥n     , it suffices
                             p,q,w
to prove this when E = S           for w ≥ n, which follows from Lemma 3.12.
    On the other hand, suppose that E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T satisfies πp,q,w
                                                               R
                                                                   (C t ⊗E) = 0 for all w <
n. We will show that fnAT E → E is an equivalence. First, we note that it is an equivalence
on πp,q,w
     R
            for all w ≥ n by definition. By assumption, t : πp,q,w+1
                                                                 R
                                                                        E → πp,q,w
                                                                               R
                                                                                       E is an
isomorphism for all w < n. On the other hand, by the above t : πp,q,w+1 (fn E) →
                                                                          R           AT


πp,q,w
  R
       (fnAT E) is also an isomorphism for all w < n. This implies that fnAT E → E in fact
induces an isomorphism on all πp,q,w R
                                         , as desired.                                       
     Finally, we are ready to prove Proposition 4.8.
Proof of Proposition 4.8. Given a bifiltered object X•,∗ , we let Diag(X•,∗ ) = X•,• de-
note the filtered object obtained by restricting along the diagonal map ZFil ,→ ZFil ×
ZFil . Then there is a span of lax symmetric monoidal functors:

                                    Diag ◦ i∗ ◦ f•        i∗


                                       Be ◦ f• ,

where the horizontal map is induced by the natural transformation f• → Y and the ver-
tical map is induced by the natural transformation i∗ → Y ◦Be. (Here as in Appendix B,
Y is the functor taking an object to its constant filtered object.)
   Applied to E ∈ SH(R)Ai2T , in filtration n this span looks like

                  MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                 2     , fn E)       MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                                    2     , E)


                          Be(fn E).

The horizontal map is an equivalence by n-effectivity of S0,0,n
                                                          2     , and the vertical map is
an equivalence by Theorem 3.2 and Proposition 4.13.                                    
4.3. Identification of i∗ MGL2 .
   In this subsection, we will identify the commutative algebra in filtered C2 -spectra
given by i∗ MGL2 . This requires two main inputs. The first is the description of the
underlying filtered object in terms of the effective slice filtration from the previous
subsection. The second is a theorem of Heard which relates the effective slice filtration
of MGL to the regular slice filtration of its Betti realization MUR .
Proposition 4.14. There is an equivalence of commutative algebras in filtered C2 -
spectra
                            i∗ MGL2 ' P2• MUR,2 .
  We prove this as a special case of a slightly stronger result where we allow tensor
powers of MGL2 . This generalization will be useful in the sequel.
Proposition 4.15. The objects i∗ MGL⊗k   2 are regular slice 2n-connective in position n.
This yields a natural factorization of the map to the constant filtered object
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                          29


                                            P2• MU⊗k
                                                  R,2
                                     '


                        i∗ MGL⊗k
                              2                               Y MU⊗k
                                                                  R,2 ,

where the indicated map is an equivalence of commutative algebras in filtered C2 -spectra.
  The result of Heard that we will need is the following:
Theorem 4.16 ([Hea19]). Under Betti realization, the slice tower of MGL⊗k goes to
the even part of the regular slice tower of MU⊗k
                                              R . More precisely, there is a commutative
diagram
   ···      Be(f2 MGL⊗k )        Be(f1 MGL⊗k )          Be(f0 MGL⊗k )     · · · Be(MGL⊗k )
                    '                       '                 '                   '

   ···        P4 (MU⊗k
                    R )              P2 (MU⊗k
                                           R )           P0 (MU⊗k
                                                               R )          · · · MU⊗k
                                                                                    R .
Moreover, the odd regular slices of MUR vanish.
  Applying Theorem 8.1, we are able to deduce the 2-completed analogue of Theo-
rem 4.16.
Proof. For notational brevity we set E := MGL⊗k    2 . Note that it is a consequence
of Theorem 8.1 that Be(E) is equivalent as a commutative algebra to MU⊗n       R,2 . Using
Proposition 4.8, we can conclude that i∗ E is given by the filtered C2 -spectrum,
         · · · → Be(f2 E) → Be(f1 E) → Be(f0 E) → Be(f−1 E) → Be(f−2 E) → · · · .
By Theorem 4.16, this is equivalent to the tower
         · → P4 Be(E) → P2 Be(E) → P0 Be(E) → P−2 Be(E) → P−4 Be(E) → · · · .
Now, consider the natural map of commutative algebras i∗ E → Y (Be(E)). Looking at
the explicit description of i∗ E we can conclude it lies in the coreflective subcategory
SpFil,2slice
  C2 ,≥0 . Thus we obtain a diagram of commutative algebras

                                         P2• (Be(E))
                                 '


                         i∗ E                              Y (Be(E)),

where the first map is an equivalence by the above.                                          
4.4. Identification of i∗ (S2 ).
   In order to finish the proof of Theorem 4.3, we need to prove the following proposition:
Proposition 4.17. There is an equivalence of commutative algebras in SpFil
                                                                       C2 ,i2 between
i∗ S2 and R• .
Proof. Recall that cb is the functor which sends a commutative algebra A to the cosim-
plicial commutative algebra given by its cobar complex A⊗(∗+1) . Consider the natural
map
                               cb(MGL2 ) → cb(MGL2 [t−1 ])
in SH(R)Ai2T . After applying i∗ , we may use i∗ ((−)[t−1 ]) ' Y (Be(−)) and the equivalence
Be(MGL2 ) ' MUR,2 to obtain a map
                                i∗ cb(MGL2 ) → Y (cb(MUR,2 )).
Applying Proposition 4.15, we obtain a factorization
                                 '
                                 2slice
                 i∗ cb(MGL2 ) −
                              → τ≥0     Y (cb(MUR,2 )) → Y (cb(MUR,2 )).
30               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Taking totalizations, we obtain
            i∗ (S2 ) ' i∗ ((S2 )∧
                                MGL2 ) ' i∗ (Tot(cb(MGL2 ))) ' Tot(i∗ (cb(MGL2 )))
                             2slice
                      ' Tot(τ≥0     Y (cb(MUR,2 ))) ' Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(1) ' R•
where the first equivalence is the MGL2 -completeness of S2 20 and the final equivalence
is the definition of R• .                                                             

     We close with a simple corollary which we will make use of in Section 6.
Corollary 4.18. There is an equivalence MGL2 ' Γ∗ (MUR,2 ) of commutative algebras
in SH(R)Ai2T .
Proof. By Theorem 4.3, it suffices to show that there is an equivalence i∗ MGL2 '
Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(MUR,2 ) of commutative algebras over i∗ S2 . Unraveling the construction
of the equivalence i∗ S2 ' Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(S2 ) we can build a diagram of commutative
algebras in SpFil
              C2 ,i2

                          '
              i∗ S2               Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(S2 )       Sh(P2• ; MUR,2 )(MUR,2 )

                                                          '
                              '
            i∗ MGL2                   P2• MUR,2 ,

where the dashed equivalence comes from Example C.10.                                             

                              5. Modules over the cofiber of ta
   In this section, we study the category of C t-modules. Our main theorem states that
this category admits an explicit, algebraic description. Below, we use IndCoh(Mfg ) to
denote Ind of the thick subcategory of MU∗ MU-comodules generated by even shifts of
the unit. For more details on this category, see Definition 5.14.
Theorem 5.1. There is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
under SpC2 ,i2
                 Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ),                     (2)
where SpC2 ,i2 acts on the left-hand-side through cC/R and on the left factor of the right-
hand-side. On Picard elements this equivalence takes
                           C t ⊗ Sp,q,w
                                  2
                                                               ⊗w
                                        7→ Σ(p−w)+(q−w)σ Z2 ⊗ ωG/M fg
                                                                      .
As a consequence of this equivalence of categories, there is an isomorphism of tri-graded
commutative rings:21
                   (C t) ∼         Exts,2w
                             M
                                                                C2
                                        MU∗ MU (MU∗ , MU∗ ⊗πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ).
             R
            πp,q,w       =
                                  w+a−s=p

   Over C the corresponding result is the main theorem of [GWX20]. Upon tensoring
with Spec(C), our theorem recovers theirs.
Notation 5.2. In the above theorem and throughout the section, we follow the con-
vention of writing C ⊗R D for the tensor product of two presentable R-linear categories
(instead of C ⊗ModR D).

   20One argument for this is that MF -completeness implies MGL -completeness and S is MF -
                                      2                             2                     2        2
complete by [HKO11a].
   21The tensor product may be moved outside the Ext, but then it must be taken in the derived sense.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                               31


Remark 5.3. In the statement of the above theorem, we use the Z-linear structure on
Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) coming from the symmetric monoidal functor (_) ⊗Z Z2 : ModZ →
Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ), where _ : ModZ → Mod(SpC2 ; Z) is the symmetric monoidal functor
discussed in Remark 5.11 below.
Remark 5.4. We will prove in Lemma 5.16 that the category Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z
IndCoh(Mfg ) admits a t-structure with heart the category of comodules in C2 -Mackey
functors over the Hopf algebroid (π C              C2
                                    ∗ρ (MUR,2 ), π ∗ρ (MUR,2 ⊗ MUR,2 )).
                                     2

   We may therefore view any such comodule as an element of Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z
IndCoh(Mfg ).
   In fact, we are able to explicitly describe the trigraded homotopy groups of Y ⊗ C t
for a more general collection of Y than just trigraded spheres.
Definition 5.5. We say that
                        L X ∈ SpC2 ,i2 is MUR,2 -projective if MUR,2 ⊗X is a retract
(as an MUR,2 -module) of α Σnα ρ MUR,2 for some set of integers nα .
  Examples of MUR,2 -projective X include S02 and MUR,2 , as well as any object of
SpC2 ,i2 built out of cells of the form Snρ
                                         2 .

Theorem 5.6. If X ∈ SpC2 ,i2 is MUR -projective, then under the equivalence of Theo-
rem 5.1 C t ⊗Γ∗ (X) corresponds to the π C                                C2
                                         ∗ρ (MUR,2 ⊗ MUR,2 )-comodule π ∗ρ (MUR,2 ⊗X).
                                           2

   Moreover, there is an isomorphism of trigraded groups,
π R (Γ∗ (X)⊗C t) ∼            Exts,2w
                        M
 p,q,w             =                          ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ (Φe (X))⊗Z π C2
                                      (MU2 )∗ MU2                                  Z ),
                                                                                   2   a+(q−w)σ   2
                        w+a−s=p

compatible with the πp,q,w
                     R
                           C t-module structure in the expected way.
  The proofs of Theorems 5.1 and 5.6 will be quite long, and correctly handling the
symmetric monoidal structures involved requires us to take a rather circuitous route.
For this reason, before proceeding we provide a sketch of the argument.
  The proof of the equivalence
                 Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )
has three main steps and one significant subtlety. First, we produce symmetric monoidal
functors into each side of Equation (2) from SpFil    C2 ,i2 . Second, we show that there are
commutative algebras R1 and R2 in SpFil  C2 ,i2 such   that the left-hand-side is equivalent to
Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; R1 ) and the right-hand-side is equivalent to Mod(SpFil
         Fil
                                                                           C2 ,i2 ; R2 ). Third, we
examine R1 and R2 directly and find that they are in fact equivalent.
   The functor into C t-modules from SpFil   C2 ,i2 is the composite of the functor i∗ from
Section 4 with C t ⊗−. The functor into the right-hand-side is more delicate to construct.
A first guess would be to use the equivalence SpFil            ∼               Fil
                                                                                    and tensor the
                                                       C2 ,i2 = SpC2 ,i2 ⊗ Sp
following pair of maps:
                               SpC2 ,i2 → Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ),
                                          Gr
                SpFil → Mod(SpFil ; Z) −−→ Mod(SpGr ; Z) → IndCoh(Mfg ).
In fact, this does not produce the correct functor; in C t-modules the periodicity class
v1 lives in C2 -degree ρ, but the given tensor product functor puts v1 in C2 -degree 0. In
order to fix this, we twist by a functor
                                               twρ
                           Mod(SpGr                      Gr
                                 C2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) −−→ Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 )

that has the effect of tensoring with Snρ on the nth graded piece. The presence of this
twist, and its interaction with the symmetric monoidal structure, is the main subtlety
of the argument.
   The second step is straightforward, and demonstrates the power of higher algebra in
proving “Koszul duality” statements as a corollary of Barr–Beck–Lurie monadicity. At
32                  ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


this point we have two commutative algebras R1 and R2 , and all we need to do is show
they are equivalent.
   The third step relies on special properties of R1 and R2 . Both commutative algebras
come equippped with a preferred presentation as a totalization of a cosimplicial diagram
of commutative algebras. What we do is show that these cosimplicial diagrams are
levelwise equivalent. Each cosimplicial diagram takes values in in the heart of a t-
structure, and in particular is determined by 1-categorical data. Thus, it is genuinely
possible to write down a comparison map by hand and check that it is an equivalence,
without concern for the potential infinity of higher coherence data.
      (1) In Section 5.1, we review the categories which appear in the right-hand-side of
          Theorem 5.1. We also construct a t-structure on the right-hand-side of Theo-
          rem 5.1 which will play an important role in our argument.
      (2) In Section 5.2, we collect some material on twisted t-structures on categories of
          graded and filtered objects, as well as on twisting isomorphisms between them.
      (3) In Section 5.3, we relate twisted t-structures to the slice filtration in C2 -equivariant
          homotopy theory. This finishes the construction of the comparison functors.
      (4) In Section 5.4, we use Koszul duality to reduce the proof of Theorems 5.1 and
          5.6 to understanding a specific pair of commutative algebras.
      (5) In Section 5.5, we prove Lemma 5.40, which is the key result that allows us to
          compare the commutative algebras R1 and R2 above. Using this lemma, we
          then complete the proof of Theorems 5.1 and 5.6.

5.1. Categories of interest.
   In this subsection we set notation for working in the various categories of interest. In
particular, we aim for a practical understanding of the category
                                 Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg )
that appears on the right-hand-side of Theorem 5.1. Proceeding from inside out, we
start by fixing notation for the category of Z-modules:
Definition 5.7. Let Ab♥ denote the abelian category of discrete abelian groups. Let
Ab denote the category of Z-modules with its standard t-structure, so that Ab♥ is the
heart of Ab.
     Next, we describe the C2 -equivariant analog of Ab:
Definition 5.8. Let M (C2 )♥ denote the abelian category of discrete Mackey functors
for the group C2 , which may be explicitly described as follows. A Mackey functor
B ∈ M (C2 )♥ consists of the following:
        • abelian groups B(C2 ) and B(∗),
        • an involution σ : B(C2 ) → B(C2 ),
        • homomorphisms r : B(∗) → B(C2 ) and t : B(C2 ) → B(∗), which satisfy the
          relations σ ◦ r = r, t ◦ σ = t and r ◦ t = 1 + σ.
We will somtimes write [C2 ] for the endomorphism t ◦ r of B(∗). We let M (C2 ) denote
the unbounded derived category of M (C2 )♥ equipped with its standard t-structure.22
   In our setting, M (C2 ) arises naturally because it is equivalent to the category of
πC
 0 S-modules in SpC2 [PSW20, Theorem 5.10]. This description equips M (C2 ) with a
   2


symmetric monoidal structure compatible with the t-structure. The induced symmetric
monoidal structure on M (C2 )♥ is known as the box product and admits an explicit
description as in [Loy17].

     22As defined, for example, in [Lur17, Definition 1.3.5.8].
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                         33


Example 5.9. Given a discrete abelian group A, we may consider the constant Mackey
functor A ∈ M (C2 )♥ . This Mackey functor is determined by A(C2 ) = A(∗) = A,
r = σ = idA and t = 2 · idA . This construction provides an exact colimit-preserving
functor
                                  _ : Ab♥ → M (C2 )♥ .
Examining the explicit description of the box product in [Loy17], we find that _ ac-
quires the structure of a (non-unital) tensor-product preserving lax symmetric monoidal
functor. In particular, we obtain a commutative algebra Z in M (C2 )♥ .
Definition 5.10. Let Ab denote the the symmetric monoidal category of Z-modules
in M (C2 ) (or, equivalently, SpC2 ), equipped with its standard t-structure. This is
equivalent to the derived category of Mod(M (C2 )♥ ; Z); in particular, we have Ab♥ =
Mod(M (C2 )♥ ; Z).
Remark 5.11. Since Z is the unit of Ab♥ , we learn that _ factors through an exact
colimit-preserving symmetric monoidal functor
                                     _ : Ab♥ → Ab♥ .
Since _ is exact, colimit-preserving and symmetric monoidal it extends uniquely to
a colimit-preserving symmetric monoidal functor _ : Ab → Ab of derived categories.
Moreover, the pair of functors A → A(∗) and A → A(C2 ) extend to limit-preserving
functors on the level of the derived category. Since this pair of functors is jointly conser-
vative, we can use the fact that A(∗) ∼= A and A(C2 ) ∼ = A to conclude that _ preserves
limits as well.
   Before proceeding to explicitly describe IndCoh(Mfg ), we record a few lemmas for
later use.
Lemma 5.12. The functor _ : Ab♥ → Ab♥ is fully faithful and left adjoint to the
functor B 7→ B(∗). Its essential image is therefore a coreflective subcategory of Ab♥ ,
with coreflector given by the counit map B(∗) → B. In particular, for any B in the
essential image of _, there are canonical isomorphisms
                                  B∼= B(∗) ∼ = B(C2 ).
Proof. Clear.                                                                              
Lemma 5.13. The forgetful functor Ab♥ → M (C2 )♥ is fully faithful, with image
spanned by the Mackey functors B for which [C2 ] = 2 as endomorphisms of B(∗).
Proof. The unit of M (C2 )♥ is the Burnside Mackey functor A, whose values are given by
A(C2 ) = Z and A(∗) = Z[[C2 ]]/([C2 ]2 − 2[C2 ]). As a commutative algebra in M (C2 )♥ ,
Z is the quotient of A by the relation [C2 ] = 2. The result follows.                 
   The following definition and construction sum up what we need to know about cate-
gories of quasicoherent and ind-coherent sheaves on Mfg :
Definition 5.14. We let Mfg denote the moduli stack of formal groups and let QCoh(Mfg )
denote the category of quasicoherent sheaves on Mfg . It is equivalent to the derived
category of evenly graded MU∗ MU-comodules [Goe08, Remarks 2.38 and 3.14].
                                                                                  ⊗k
   Let D ⊂ QCoh(Mfg ) denote the thick subcategory generated by the sheaves ωG/M     fg
for k ∈ Z, where ωG/Mfg is the sheaf of invariant differentials on the universal formal
group G/Mfg . We define IndCoh(Mfg ) := Ind(D). The category IndCoh(Mfg ) is
equivalent to Hovey’s category of evenly graded stable comodules StableMU∗ MU , c.f.
[BHV18, Remark 4.30].
   Both QCoh(Mfg ) and IndCoh(Mfg ) are naturally stable presentably symmetric monoidal
categories and come equipped with compatible t-structures whose hearts are equivalent
to the 1-category of MU∗ MU-comodules.
34               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Construction 5.15. Since QCoh(Mfg ) is equivalent to the derived category of a
Grothendieck abelian category, it is equipped with the structure of a colimit-preserving
symmetric monoidal functor Ab → QCoh(Mfg ). Letting Abfin denote the full sub-
category of compact objects, this restricts to an exact symmetric monoidal functor
Abfin → D, where D is defined as in Definition 5.14. Taking Ind and using the fact that
Ab is compactly generated, we obtain a colimit-preserving symmetric monoidal functor
                       Ab ' Ind(Abfin ) → Ind(D) = IndCoh(Mfg ).
                                             _      −⊗Z Z
   Using this functor and the functor Ab −        2
                                         → Ab −−−−→ Abi2 , we are able to define the
stable presentably symmetric monoidal category
                                  Abi2 ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ),
which appeared in Theorem 5.1 with slightly different notation.
  The core of our understanding of Abi2 ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ) rests on the following lemma,
where we put a t-structure on this category whose heart we can describe explicitly.
Lemma 5.16. There exists a t-structure on Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg ) with the following
properties:
    (1) It is compatible with the symmetric monoidal structure, accessible, compatible
        with filtered colimits and right complete.
    (2) The natural functor
                Abi2,≥0 ⊗Ab≥0 IndCoh(Mfg )≥0 → Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg )
         is fully faithful with essential image the connective objects.
     (3) The natural functor
                  Ab♥                   ♥
                    i2 ⊗Ab♥ IndCoh(Mfg ) → Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg )

         is fully faithful with essential image the heart of Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg ).

   Using the explicit description of Ab♥ given by Definition 5.8 and Lemma 5.13 and
the fact that IndCoh(Mfg )♥ is equivalent to the category of evenly-graded MU∗ MU-
comodules, we obtain the following description of
                                Ab♥                   ♥
                                  i2 ⊗Ab♥ IndCoh(Mfg ) :

this is the category of pairs of (MU2 )∗ MU2 -comodules A(C2 ) and A(∗) equipped with
following structures (all of which are compatible with the comodule structure):
       • maps r : A(∗) → A(C2 ) and t : A(C2 ) → A(∗), along with an involution
         σ : A(C2 ) → A(C2 ),
       • which satisfy the relations σ ◦ r = r, t ◦ σ = t, t ◦ r = 2 and r ◦ t = 1 + σ.
   In other words, Ab♥
                     i2 ⊗Ab♥ IndCoh(Mfg ) is the category of evenly graded comodules
                                           ♥

over the Hopf algebroid ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ MU2 ) in graded C2 -Mackey functors.
Remark 5.17. Using the fact that
               ((MUR,2 )∗ρ , (MUR,2 )∗ρ MUR,2 ) ∼
                                                = ((MU2 )2∗ , (MU2 )2∗ MU2 ),
see [HK01, Theorems 2.25 and 2.28], this category may equally well be described as the
category of graded comodules over the Hopf algebroid ((MUR,2 )∗ρ , (MUR,2 )∗ρ MUR,2 ) in
graded C2 -Mackey functors.
   The proof of Lemma 5.16 is not difficult, but it will rely on material from [Lur18b,
Appendix C] which we presently recount. We begin with a simple method for producing
t-structures.
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                       35


Construction 5.18. Given a pointed presentable category C, we let Sp ⊗C ' Sp(C)
denote the category of spectrum objects in C. It is a stable presentable category.
   The category Sp ⊗C admits a t-structure with (Sp ⊗C)≥0 equal to the essential image
of the functor Σ∞ : C → Sp ⊗C. This t-structure is accessible and right complete.
   Note that if C is endowed with the structure of a presentably symmetric monoidal
category, then Sp ⊗C naturally inherits this structure and the t-structure defined above
is compatible with it.
   In fact, the following lemma, which follows from [Lur18b, Remark C.3.1.5], demon-
strates that this construction is the universal way to produce a (well-behaved) t-structure
on a presentable stable category.
Lemma 5.19. Suppose that (C, C≥0 ) is a stable presentably symmetric monoidal category
with compatible t-structure. Suppose that the t-structure is accessible, compatible with
filtered colimits and right complete.
    Then there is a natural equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories with compatible
t-structure
                            (C, C≥0 ) ' (Sp ⊗C≥0 , (Sp ⊗C≥0 )≥0 ).
   In conclusion, we may as well work with the categories of connective objects. For
Ab, Abi2 , and IndCoh(Mfg ), these are all Grothendieck prestable categories in the sense
of [Lur18b, Definition C.1.4.2].
Recollection 5.20. We let Groth∞ denote the category of Grothendieck prestable
categories [Lur18b, Definition C.3.0.5]. By [Lur18b, Theorem C.4.2.1], Groth∞ is a
symmetric monoidal category with tensor product given by the usual tensor product of
presentable categories and unit Sp≥0 .
   Moreover, let Groth1 denote the category of Grothendieck abelian 1-categories. It is
a symmetric monoidal category with tensor product given by the usual tensor product
of presentable categories and unit Ab♥ [Lur18b, Corollary C.5.4.19]. There is a functor
τ≤0 : Groth∞ → Groth1 sending a Grothendieck prestable category to its subcategory of
discrete objects. By [Lur18b, Remark C.5.4.20], the functor τ≤0 is symmetric monoidal.
   We summarize this in the following span of symmetric monoidal categories
                                         Groth∞
                                                      τ≤0
                                      Sp ⊗−

                         PrL,Stab                           Groth1 .
Proof (of Lemma 5.16). Using Lemma 5.19 and [Lur18b, Remark C.4.2.3], we have
                                            
           Sp ⊗ Abi2,≥0 ⊗Ab≥0 IndCoh(Mfg )≥0 ' Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg ).
Moreover, since Abi2,≥0 ⊗Ab≥0 IndCoh(Mfg )≥0 is prestable, the Σ∞ functor identifies it
with Sp ⊗ Abi2,≥0 ⊗Ab≥0 IndCoh(Mfg )≥0 ≥0 .
                                             

   This immediately implies the first two properties, with the exception of compatibility
with filtered colimits. This follows from the fact that Abi2,≥0 ⊗Ab≥0 IndCoh(Mfg )≥0 is
compactly generated, which holds becuase each one of Abi2,≥0 , Ab≥0 and IndCoh(Mfg )≥0
is compactly generated [Lur18b, Corollary C.6.2.3].
   The third property follows from the fact that C ♥ = τ≤0 (C≥0 ) and the fact that
τ≤0 : Groth∞ → Groth1 is symmetric monoidal.                                           
5.2. Twistings I: t-structures on filtered objects.
   We begin this subsection with a discussion of several natural t-structures on categories
of graded and filtered objects, obtained by twisting a given t-structure by a Picard
element. In the filtered case our constructions are a straightforward generalization of
a construction of Beilinson. Although these constructions are simple, they have the
36               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


effect of modifying the symmetric monoidal structure on the heart of a category. Next,
we explicitly describe this modification at the level of the heart, where it admits a
description in terms of an Euler characteristic. Read another way, there is an Euler
characteristic obstruction to producing symmetric monoidal twisting functors. We close
the subsection by producing symmetric monoidal twisting functors whenever this Euler
characteristic obstruction vanishes.
Definition 5.21. For the remainder of this subsection, we fix the following data:
a stable, presentably symmetric monoidal category C equipped with a compatible t-
structure23 and a Picard element L.
   We then define the L-twisted t-structure on C Gr and C Fil as follows:
      • An object X• of C Gr is ≥ 0 in the L-twisted t-structure if, for all n, L⊗−n ⊗ Xn
        is ≥ 0 in the original t-structure.
      • Similarly, an object X• of C Fil is ≥ 0 in the L-twisted t-structure if L⊗−n ⊗ Xn
        is ≥ 0 in the original t-structure, for all n.
We denote the hearts of these t-structures by C Gr,L,♥ and C Fil,L,♥ respectively. We
denote the ith L-twisted t-structure homotopy objects by π L,Gr
                                                              i    and π L,Fil
                                                                         i     respectively.
When L = 1, we frequently omit it from the notation.
     We summarize the basic properties of this definition in the following lemma.
Lemma 5.22. In the graded case:
   (1) The L-twisted t-structure on C Gr is compatible with the symmetric monoidal
       structure.
   (2) An object X• is < 0 in the L-twisted t-structure if and only if, for all n, L⊗−n ⊗
       Xn is < 0 in the original t-structure.
   (3) The t-structure homotopy groups are determined by the following formula:
                                       ∼ L⊗n π (L⊗−n ⊗ Xn ).
                         (π L,Gr X• )n =
                                0                    0
Assuming that L ≥ 0, we obtain similar results in the filtered case:
   (1’) The L-twisted t-structure on C Fil is compatible with the symmetric monoidal
        structure.
   (2’) An object X• is < 0 in the L-twisted t-structure if and only if L⊗−n ⊗ Xn < 0.
   (3’) The t-structure homotopy groups are given the by following formula:
                          (π L,Fil X• )n ∼
                                0        = L⊗n π (L⊗−n ⊗ Xn ).
                                                     0
   Under the stronger assumption that L ≥ 1, the functor C Gr → C Fil which is right
adjoint to the associated graded functor restricts to an equivalence of symmetric monoidal
1-categories
                                    C Gr,L,♥ ' C Fil,L,♥ .
Notation 5.23. We write − ⊗♥,L − for the tensor product induced on either C Gr,L,♥
or C Fil,L,♥ . In the case that L = 1, we simply write − ⊗♥ −.
Proof. The statements (1), (2) and (3) are all clear. We therefore restrct ourselves to
the filtered case for the rest of the proof.
   From the expression of the tensor product as a Day convolution, we observe that a
tensor product of connective objects has nth term presented as a colimit over a diagram
of connective objects tensored with L at least n times. Since L ≥ 0 we may conclude
that (1’) holds.
   The expression for the homotopy objects in (3’) follows from (2’) in a straightforward
way. We now prove (2’). Suppose that X• is an object such that L⊗−n ⊗ Xn < 0.
   23Here compatible means that a tensor product of objects which are ≥ 0 is ≥ 0 itself, and that the
unit is ≥ 0.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                             37


We want to show that X• < 0, i.e. that it recieves no maps from Y• ≥ 0. Using the
condition that L ≥ 0, we learn that [Yn , Xm ] = 0 for all n > m, which is enough to
imply that [Y• , X• ] = 0.
   Suppose that X• < 0; then we would like to show that L⊗−n ⊗ Xn < 0. Associated
to every Y ≥ 0 in C we can consider the filtered object Y ⊗ L⊗n (n), which is depicted
below:
                                                id          id
                       · · · → 0 → 0 → Y ⊗ L⊗n −→ Y ⊗ L⊗n −→ . . .
Here, the first nonzero object occurs at position n. Using the asssumption that L ≥ 0,
we can conclude that Y ⊗ L⊗n (n) ≥ 0. Now, on mapping out of this object we have
              ∗ ' Ω∞ MapC Fil (Y ⊗ L⊗n (n), X) ' Ω∞ MapC (Y ⊗ L⊗n , Xn ),
which implies that L⊗−n ⊗ Xn < 0 for all n, as desired.
   We now proceed to prove the final statement. Let τ : 1C Fil (−1) → 1C Fil denote the
shift map in C Fil . Then Cτ admits an E∞ -algebra structure in C Fil such that there is an
equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories C Gr ' Mod(C Fil ; Cτ ) (cf. Lemma B.5).
Using the assumption that L ≥ 0, we learn that 1C Fil and Cτ are ≥ 0. As a consequence,
we find that C Gr,L,♥ may be identified with Mod(C Fil,L,♥ ; π L
                                                               0 Cτ ).
                                                            0 1C Fil → π 0 Cτ is an equiva-
   The proposition will therefore follow if we prove that π L            L

lence. By Lemma 5.22, we find that
                                           (
                                              ⊗n
                                         ∼ L π0 (L
                                                  ⊗−n
                                                      ) if n ≤ 0,
                          L,Fil
                       (π 0     1CFil )n =
                                            0            otherwise.

Since L ≥ 1 by assumption, we find for n < 0 that L⊗n π0 L⊗−n ∼
                                                              = 0, whereas for n = 0
we just get π0 1C .
   On the other hand, we have that
                                            π0 1C if n = 0,
                                          (
                            L,Fil
                         (π 0           ∼
                                  Cτ )n =
                                            0     otherwise.

It follows from this that the map π L,Fil
                                    0     1CFil → πL,Fil
                                                   0     Cτ is an equivalence, as desired.
                                                                                        

   We can now profitably define the twist functors.
Construction 5.24. Given a symmetric monoidal Grothendieck abelian 1-category A
and an invertible object a ∈ A, we can construct a monoidal functor ia : Z → A which
sends 1 to a.24 If the swap map sa,a is the identity, then we can make this functor
symmetric monoidal. Tensoring up with Ab♥ , we obtain a monoidal (or symmetric
monoidal) functor
                                                  1(1)7→a
                                    ia : AbGr,♥ −−−−−→ A.
   In our situation of interest, we take A = C Gr,L,♥ and a = (π 0 1) ⊗ L(1). Then we can
define the functor twL as the composite
                                        Id⊗i(π 1)⊗L(1)                  ⊗
             C Gr,♥ ∼
                    = C ♥ ⊗ AbGr,♥ −−−−−−−−−→ C ♥ ⊗ C Gr,L,♥ −
                                        0
                                                             → C Gr,L,♥ .
On objects this has the effect of sending {Xn } to {Xn ⊗ L⊗n }. It is easy to see that
this is a monoidal equivalence between C Gr,♥ and C Gr,L,♥ , and is further symmetric
monoidal if sa,a is the identity.

    24By symmetric monoidal Grothendieck abelian 1-category, we mean a commutative algebra object
of the symmetric monoidal category Groth1 discussed in Recollection 5.20. In other words, we assume
that the tensor product commutes with colimits in each variable.
38              ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   The above construction succinctly explains how much the symmetric monoidal struc-
ture on C Gr,L,♥ has been twisted in terms of the quantity sa,a . We now give a description
of this quantity in terms of the following standard definition:
Definition 5.25. Given a dualizable object X, with dual X ∨ , unit η, and counit , the
trace of an endomorphism f : X → X is the element tr(f ) ∈ π0 End(1) given by the
composite
                                  f ⊗X ∨           s
                  1−                                     − 1.
                     η                                 ∨ 
                   → X ⊗ X ∨ −−−−→ X ⊗ X ∨ −−−−→ X ∨ ⊗ X →
                                            X,X


The trace of the identity is called the Euler characteristic and denoted χ(X).
   A simple diagram chase tells us that the Euler characteristic is multiplicative and
defines an End(1)-linear map tr : End(X) → End(1). Moreover, one can compute that
the trace of the swap map sX,X is equal to χ(X). In the case where X is invertible
the trace map is an isomorphism, and we can use this to conclude that the condition
sa,a = Ida⊗a in Construction 5.24 is equivalent to asking that χ(a) = 1. Specializing
further to the case a = (π 0 1) ⊗ L(1), we note that the diagram computing the Euler
characteristic of (π 0 1) ⊗ L(1) is π L,Gr
                                      0    applied to the diagram computing the Euler
characteristic of L(1) in the ambient category C Gr . This implies that
                         χ(a) = χ(L(1)) = χ(L)χ(1(1)) = χ(L) · 1.
Thus, we have proved:
Lemma 5.26. The functor twL can be made symmetric monoidal if χ(L) = 1.
   Conversely, if we assume that twL is symmetric monoidal, then we can make the
following Euler characteristic computation:
            1 = twL (1) = twL (χ(1(1))) = χ(twL (1(1))) = χ(L(1)) = χ(L).
Remark 5.27. Examining the failure of twL to be symmetric monoidal, we find that
in general the symmetric monoidal structure on C Gr,L,♥ is twisted by the Euler charac-
teristic χ(L).
Example 5.28. If we take C = Sp with its usual t-structure, then the S1 -twisted
               1
category SpGr,S ,♥ is equivalent to the symmetric monoidal category of graded abelian
groups with the Koszul sign convention, since χ(S1 ) = −1.
                              2
   On the other hand, SpGr,S ,♥ is symmetric monoidally equivalent to the category of
graded abelian groups by Lemma 5.26, since χ(S2 ) = 1.
Lemma 5.29. Suppose that C is equivalent to the derived category of its heart C ♥
as a symmetric monoidal category with compatible t-structure. Then there exists an
equivalence of monoidal categories twL : C Gr ' C Gr making the following diagram of
monoidal functors commute:
                                           twL
                                  C Gr,♥         C Gr,L,♥

                                             L
                                          tw
                                  C Gr           C Gr .
If χ(L) = 1, then the above square naturally lifts to a diagram of symmetric monoidal
functors. On objects, twL : C Gr → C Gr is given by {Xn } 7→ {Xn ⊗ L⊗n }.
Proof. The assumption implies that C Gr , equipped with the usual t-structure, is equiv-
alent as a symmetric monoidal category with compatible t-struture to D(C Gr,♥ ). It
also implies that C Gr , when equipped with the L-twisted t-structure, is equivalent as a
symmteric monoidal category with compatible t-struture to D(C Gr,L,♥ ).
   It follows that the equivalence of monoidal 1-categories twL : C Gr,♥ → C Gr,L,♥ of
Lemma 5.26 determines a compatible equivalence of monoidal categories twL : C Gr →
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                        39


C Gr , via taking derived categories. If χ(L) = 1, these are equivalences of symmetric
monoidal categories by Lemma 5.26.                                                  

5.3. Twistings II: the slice filtration.
   In this short subsection, we specialize the material from the previous subsection to
the case of interest. This means we look at SpC2 ,i2 with Picard element Sρ2 . In order
to connect this with MUR,2 and the material from Section 4, we relate the ρ-twisted
t-structure to the regular slice filtration.
Example 5.30. If we take C = SpC2 , then the following Euler characteristic computa-
tions provide the three possible nontrivial twists on graded Mackey functors:
                χ(Sσ ) = 1 − [C2 ],    χ(S1 ) = −1,            χ(Sρ ) = [C2 ] − 1.
To verify this, one uses the compatibility of the Euler characteristic with the symmetric
monoidal functors Φe and ΦC2 .
                                           Gr,Σρ Z ,♥
Example 5.31. Write AbGr,ρ,♥i2     for Abi2    2
                                                  . Then, since the image of χ(Sρ ) in
π0 Z2 is 1, there is a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                                                 '
                                twρ : AbGr,♥
                                        i2   −   Gr,ρ,♥
                                             → Abi2     ,
by Lemma 5.26. Applying Lemma 5.29, we can then upgrade this to a diagram of
symmetric monoidal functors
                                           twρ
                                 AbGr,♥
                                   i2
                                                       Gr,ρ,♥
                                                     Abi2


                                           twρ
                                  AbGr
                                    i2                AbGr
                                                        i2 .

Convention 5.32. From this point on, our category C will be one of SpC2 ,i2 , M (C2 )i2 ,
Abi2 or Abi2 with its usual t-structure, and the Picard element we work with will be
Sρ2 , Σρ π C
           0 S2 , Σ Z2 or Σ Z2 , respectively. In order to reduce the notational burden,
            2      ρ       2

we denote the former three Picard objects by ρ and the final Picard object by 2 in
                                                               ρ
superscripts. So, in the example of SpC2 ,i2 , we will write τ≥0   for the connective cover,
π ρ0 for the 0th homotopy object and SpFil,ρ,♥
                                          C2 ,i2 for the heart of Sp C2 ,i2 .
                                                                     Fil


  This key result of this section is the following:
Lemma 5.33. Let E ∈ SpC2 ,i2 . Then
            ρ
           τ≥0 Y (E) ' (· · · → P4 E → P2 E → P0 E → P−2 E → P−4 E → . . . ) ,
where Y is the functor that sends an object to the associated constant filtered object. If
we further suppose that π C
                          nρ−1 E = 0 for all n, there is a natural equivalence
                           2


                            ρ
                        Gr(τ≥0 Y (E)) ' π ρ0 Y (E) ∼
                                                   = {Σnρ π C
                                                            nρ E}.
                                                             2



Finally, if π nρ E is a constant Mackey functor for all n, then π ρ0 Y (E) factors through
the full subcategory
                          AbGr,ρ,♥
                             i2
                                            Gr,ρ,♥
                                   ⊂ M (C2 )i2     ' SpCFil,ρ,♥
                                                         2 ,i2
                                                                .
Proof. This lemma has three statements. For the first statement, it suffices to note the
following:
    (1) A C2 -spectrum is t-structure 0-connective if and only if it is regular slice 0-
        connective.
    (2) A C2 -spectrum E is regular slice 2n-connective if and only if E ⊗ S−nρ is regular
        slice 0-connective.
40               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   For the second statement, since Sρ2 ≥ 1, we can use the final statement of Lemma 5.22
to obtain a canonical map
                                        ρ
                                    Gr(τ≥0 Y (E)) → π ρ0 Y (E).
On the one hand, we have π ρ0 Y (E) ∼           nρ E} by Lemma 5.22(3’).
                                       = {Σnρ π C 2
                                                                               Since by
assumption the odd slices of E vanish, we learn that the (2n)th slice of E is equivalent
         nρ E and that there are cofiber sequences
to Σnρ π C2



                                  P2n+2 E → P2n E → Σnρ π C
                                                          nρ E.
                                                            2



The desired equivalence now follows from the first statement.
  The third statement now follows from the fact that any discrete C2 -Mackey functor
which is constant admits a (necessarily unique) Z-module structure.               
5.4. Reductions.
   In this subsection, we express each side of the equivalence (2) of Theorem 5.1 as the
category of modules over some commutative algebra in SpFil   C2 ,i2 . Almost everything in
this subsection is a standard application of Lurie’s theory of higher algebra. We have
extracted the necessary material in Appendix A, where we present it in a digested form.
   We begin with the left-hand-side of (2).
Lemma 5.34. The cofiber of t : S20,0,−1 → S0,0,0
                                            2    is a commutative algebra in SH(R)i2 .
Furthermore, there is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories
                         Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' Mod(SpGr
                                                      C2 ,i2 ; Gr(R• )),
                                 
where R• = Tot∗        P2• MU⊗∗+1
                             R,2


                                                   C2 ,i2 is denoted by τ . Tensoring the
Proof. Recall that the shift map S2 (−1) → S2 in SpFil
equivalence of Example A.5 with SpC2 ,i2 and applying Lemma A.10, we see that there
is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                                   SpGr             Fil
                                     C2 ,i2 ' Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Cτ ).

    Under the symmetric monoidal functor i∗ : SpFil
                                                  C2 ,i2 → SH(R)i2 constructed in Propo-
                                                                  AT

sition 4.5, the commutative algebra Cτ maps to C t. Therefore, using Lemma A.10, we
have
                    Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' SpGr
                                             C2 ,i2 ⊗SpFil
                                                         C ,i2
                                                               SH(R)Ai2T .
                                                                 2

Using Theorem 4.3, there is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal cate-
               C2 ,i2 between SH(R)i2 and Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; R• ). Tensoring down along the
gories under SpFil                 AT           Fil

associated graded ring map and using Lemma A.10, we obtain equivalences
               SpGr
                 C2 ,i2 ⊗SpFil
                           C ,i2
                                 SH(R)Ai2T ' SpGr
                                               C2 ,i2 ⊗SpFil
                                                         C ,i2
                                                               Mod(SpFil
                                                                     C2 ,i2 ; R• )
                              2                              2

                                            ' Mod(SpFil
                                                    C2 ,i2 ; Gr(R• )).                  
     Now we proceed to the right-hand-side of (2).
Lemma 5.35. The Euler characteristic of ωG/Mfg ∈ IndCoh(Mfg )♥ is equal to 1. As
a consequence, Construction 5.24 provides a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                                  p∗ : AbGr,♥ → IndCoh(Mfg )♥
which sends Z(1) to ωG/Mfg .
Proof. Let L denote the Lazard ring. Then the flat cover Spec(L) → Mfg determines
a pullback map IndCoh(Mfg ) → ModL . This determines an injective pullback map
π0 End(OMfg ) → π0 End(L). Since the pullback of ωG/Mfg is equivalent to L we learn
that χ(ωG/Mfg ) = 1.                                                             
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                         41


   Since p∗ sends a family of compact dualizable objects (the powers of Z(1)) to a family
of compact dualizable generators (the powers of ωG/Mfg ), we may apply Proposition A.4
to obtain the following lemma:

Lemma 5.36. There is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories

                          IndCoh(Mfg ) ' Mod(AbGr ; p∗ OMfg ).

  Using Lemma 5.36 and Lemma A.10, we obtain the following corollary:

Corollary 5.37. There is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories

                   Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg ) ' Mod(AbGr
                                                 i2 ; p∗ OMfg ⊗Z Z2 ).

5.5. The main lemma.
   In this subsection, we prove our main lemma, Lemma 5.40, and use it to prove
Theorems 5.1 and 5.6. This lemma gives us an explicit formula for Gr(i∗ (Γ∗ (−))) on a
restricted class of objects. Once we have this formula the remaining work is relatively
easy. We begin with a definition and a couple of useful lemmas.

Definition 5.38.
     • Let Spproj
              C2 ,i2 denote the full subcategory of E ∈ SpC2 ,i2 for which MUR,2 ⊗E is
       a retract of a sum of pure suspensions of MUR,2 (a suspension Σa+bσ MUR,2 is
       said to be pure if a = b).
     • Let Spproj
              i2   denote the full subcategory of E ∈ Spi2 for which MU2 ⊗E is a retract
       of a sum of even suspensions of MU2 .
Since the underlying spectrum of MUR,2 is MU2 , the underlying spectrum of an object
of Spproj                      proj                   proj         proj
      C2 ,i2 is contained in Spi2 . Note that both SpC2 ,i2 and Spi2    contain units and
are closed under tensor product, so each inherits the structure of a symmetric monoidal
category.

Lemma 5.39. Suppose that E ∈ Spproj
                               C2 ,i2 . Then


                              (MUR,2 ) 2 (E) ∼
                                      C
                                      nρ
                                             = (MU2 )2∗ (E).

                             C
As a consequence, (MUR,2 ) 2 (E) acquires the structure of a Z2 -module.
                             nρ


Proof. By definition of Spproj
                          C2 ,i2 , it suffices to note that this is true for E = S2 , which
follows from [HK01, Theorem 2.28].                                                       

Lemma 5.40. Let h denote the symmetric monoidal functor h : Spproji2 → IndCoh(Mfg )♥ i2
which sends a spectrum to its associated ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ MU2 )-comodule. There is a
commutative diagram of lax symmetric monoidal functors
                                           i∗ ◦Γ∗
        Spproj
          C2 ,i2                                                              SpFil
                                                                                C2 ,i2

            Φe                                                                     Gr

                    h                      p∗           _            tw   ρ
        Spproj
          i2            IndCoh(Mfg )♥
                                    i2          AbGr
                                                  i2        AbGr
                                                              i2              SpGr
                                                                                C2 ,i2 .


Proof. Our argument will rest on the existence of the following commuting diagram of
lax symmetric monoidal functors.
42               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER




                            Spproj
                              i2                                           Spproj
                                                                             C2 ,i2
                                                  Φe
                                 −⊗cb(MU2 )                                      −⊗cb(MUR,i2 )

                                                                    f
                               Sp∆
                                 i2                                        Sp∆
                                                                             C2 ,i2              SpFil,∆
                                                                                                   C2 ,i2
                     h                            Φe                                    ρ
                                                                                       τ≥0 Y
                                 π 20 Y                                    πρ
                                                                            0Y                        Gr
                                                                forget
 IndCoh(Mfg )♥
             i2           AbGr,2,♥,∆
                            i2
                                                 Gr,ρ,♥,∆
                                               Abi2                         Gr,ρ,♥,∆
                                                                          SpC2 ,i2
                                                                                                   Gr,∆
                                                                                                 SpC 2 ,i2
                                          Φe

                                 tw−2                  tw−ρ
                     p∗
                          AbGr,♥,∆
                            i2
                                                 Gr,♥,∆
                                               Abi2                                                   Tot
                                          Φe
                                 Tot                   Tot

                                                                    twρ                forget
                               AbGr
                                 i2              AbGr
                                                   i2                       AbGr
                                                                              i2                 SpGr
                                                                                                   C2 ,i2 .
                                          Φe

   The squares formed by the underlying functor, Φe , commute since underlying com-
mutes with limits and colimits, the underlying of Sρ2 is S22 and the underlying of MUR,2 is
                                                                                   Fil,ρ,♥,∆
MU2 . In grid position (4, 3) we have implicitly made use of the equivalence SpC     2
                                                                                             '
   Gr,ρ,♥,∆                              ρ
SpC2         to identify the target of π 0 Y with the latter. The upper-right square com-
mutes by Lemma 5.33. The dashed arrow, labelled f , is unique (and lax symmetric
monoidal) if it exists since the forgetful functor is fully-faithful. The dashed arrow then
exists by Lemma 5.39. The large bottom-right square commutes because twρ commutes
with Tot. Finally, the existence of the factorization along the left side is a corollary of our
ability to identify the E2 -page of the Adams–Novikov spectral sequence (see [Ada95]).
   Using the fact that Gr and Tot commute, we have equivalences
                                ρ
          Gr ◦i∗ ◦ Γ∗ ' Tot Gr(τ≥0 Y (− ⊗ cb(MUR,2 ))) ' twρ (Tot(tw−ρ (f (−)))).
By Lemma 5.39, the functor f (and its composition with the twist) lands in the full
subcategory of the target which is spanned, in each grading and cosimplicial degree,
by Z2 -modules for which the restriction map r is an equivalence. Thus, we have an
equivalence of lax symmetric monoidal functors
                    twρ (Tot(tw−ρ (f (−)))) ' twρ (Tot(Φe tw−ρ (f (−)))).
Since _ commutes with limits we then have further equivalences,
         twρ (Tot(Φe tw−ρ (f (−)))) ' twρ (Tot(Φe tw−ρ (f (−)))) ' twρ (p∗ hΦe (−)).                     

     Finally, we are able to prove our main theorems:

Proof of Theorem 5.1 and Theorem 5.6 (part 1). We have a chain of symmetric monoidal
equivalences:

                           '                                   ' Gr     ρ
      Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) −−→ Mod(SpGr
                                     C2 ,i2 ; Gr(R• )) −−→ Mod(Abi2 ; tw (p∗ OMfg ))
                          5.34                                5.40
                            '                                 '
                          −−−→ Mod(AbGr
                                     i2 ; p∗ OMfg ) −−→ Abi2 ⊗Ab IndCoh(Mfg )
                          tw−ρ                               5.37

    The claim about the SpC2 ,i2 -algebra structure follows once we know SpC2 ,i2 acts
through the ambient category at each step. The key points here are that the equivalence
from Lemma 5.40 was induced by an equivalence of algebras and that the twist functor
is an Abi2 -algebra map.
    Using the SpC2 ,i2 -linearity, the claim about Picard elements reduces to tracking C t ⊗
S20,0,1
        around the diagram. Under the first equivalence, C t ⊗ S0,0,12   goes to 1(1). The
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                43


twist by −ρ sends this to Σρ 1(1). The final equivalence sends 1(1) to Z2 ⊗ ωG/Mfg .
Altogether we learn that C t ⊗ S0,0,1
                                  2   is sent to Σ−ρ Z2 ⊗ ωG/Mfg , as desired.
                             proj
  Now suppose that X ∈ SpC2 . Then, using Lemma 5.40, we have
                                Gr(i∗ (Γ∗ X)) ' twρ (p∗ hΦe (X)).
Continuing along the sequence of equivalences above, we see that this object is sent to
Z2 ⊗ h(Φe (X)), as desired.                                                          
   In order to calculate the homotopy groups of C t-modules, we begin with a simple
lemma.
Lemma 5.41. Given any A ∈ Ab, we have
                           A∼
                               M
                       C2
                     πp+qσ  =     πp−a (A ⊗ πa+qσ Z) .
                                            a

Proof. Consider the composite Ab → Ab → AbGr given by A 7→ A 7→ {Map(Sqσ , A)}.
This composite is colimit-preserving, hence is equivalent to A 7→ {A ⊗ Map(Sqσ , Z)}.
Now, we have                               M
                            Map(Sqσ , Z) '      Σa πa+qσ Z
                                                     a
because it is a Z-module, and the result follows by applying πp .                                  
Proof of Theorem 5.1 and Theorem 5.6 (part 2). We now turn to our assertions about
homotopy groups. Tracing through the various equivalences, we find that for X which
is MUR,2 -projective
                π R (C t ⊗ X) ∼
                   p,q,w      = π C2          ((Z ⊗Z p∗ hΦe (X))w ).
                                          (p−w)+(q−w)σ      2     2


We can commute taking the w component past the tensor product and then apply
                                     th

Lemma 5.41 and the fact that p∗ h computes Ext(MU2 )∗ MU2 to conclude that
 R
πp,q,w (C t ⊗ X) ∼  C2
                 = π(p−w)+(q−w)σ (Z2 ⊗Z2 (p∗ hΦe (X))w )
                 ∼     πp−w−a (πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ⊗Z2 Ext∗,2w
                   M
                                                                                    e
                 =                                  (MU2 )∗ MU2 ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ Φ (X)))
                       a
                  ∼        πp−w−a (Ext∗,2w
                      M
                                                                                       e
                  =                   (MU2 )∗ MU2 ((MU2 )∗ , πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ⊗Z2 (MU2 )∗ Φ (X)))
                       a
                  ∼        Exta+w−p,2w
                      M
                                                                               e
                  =           (MU2 )∗ MU2 ((MU2 )∗ , πa+(q−w)σ Z2 ⊗Z2 (MU2 )∗ Φ (X)).
                       a
       C2
Since πa+qσ Z2  is isomorphic to Z2 or F2 , and (MU2 )∗ X is torsion-free (since it is a
projective (MU2 )∗ -module), the tensor product inside the Ext can be taken in a 1-
categorical sense.                                                                    

                             6. The Chow t-structure and νR
   In this section, we discuss the Chow t-structure on SH(R)Ai2T and how it can be used
to define an interesting lax symmetric monoidal functor
                                    νR : SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T .
In the context of DM(k), the Chow t-structure was first studied by Bondarko [Bon10].25
In the context of SH(C)AT it was studied by Pstragowski in [Pst18]. The Chow t-
structure on SH(k) is the subject of forthcoming work of Bachmann–Kong–Wang–Xu,
   25The publication history of this definition is somewhat complicated. In the published version of
[Bon10], the Chow t-structure is only conjectured, not shown, to exist. However, in a later version of
[Bon10] which appeared on the arXiv, Bondarko gave a construction of the Chow t-structure.
44               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


who we thank for carefully explaining their results to us. Among their results is a
determination of the heart of the Chow t-structure in full generality.26
   In Section 6.1, we define the Chow t-structure on SH(R)Ai2T , determine its heart and
give a formula for the t-structure homotopy objects. In Section 6.2, we use the Chow
t-structure to define the functor
                                   νR : SpC2 → SH(R)Ai2T .
We prove several basic properties of this functor, compare it with the functor Γ∗ defined
in Section 4, and show that several Artin-Tate R-motivic spectra may be recovered from
their Betti realizations via νR .
6.1. The Chow t-structure.
   In this section, we define the Chow t-structure on Artin-Tate R-motivic spectra,
compute its heart, and describe the t-structure homotopy objects, which we denote
πkC−♥ .
Definition 6.1. By [Lur17, Proposition 1.2.1.16], we can construct a t-structure on
SH(R)Ai2T with
                                   ≥0 generated under colimits and extensions by
     • connective part (SH(R)Ai2T )C
                         {Sn+k
                           2
                              1 ,n+k2 ,n
                                         | k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0}.
       • (−1)-coconnective part (SH(R)Ai2T )C    <0 spanned by those X ∈ SH(R)i2 with
                                                                                     AT

         πn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n X = 0 for all n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z satisfying k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0.
          R

We call this t-structure the Chow t-structure on SH(R)Ai2T . Moreover, we let τ≥0C
                                                                                    :
SH(R)i2 → (SH(R)i2 )≥0 denote the connective cover with respect to the Chow t-
       AT             AT C


structure, and let πnC−♥ : SH(R)Ai2T → SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ denote the homotopy object func-
tors.
     The following result is immediate from the definition:
Proposition 6.2. The Chow t-structure on SH(R)Ai2T is compatible with the symmet-
ric monoidal structure, right complete and compatible with filtered colimits. Moreover,
Σn,n,n restricts to an equivalence Σn,n,n : (SH(R)Ai2T )C          AT C
                                                        ≥0 → (SH(R)i2 )≥0 .

     The main two theorems that we prove in this section are as follows:
Theorem 6.3. Let SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ denote the heart of SH(R)Ai2T with respect to the Chow
t-structure. Then there is a symmetric monoidal equivalence of categories
                       SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ ' Comod(Ab♥
                                               i2 ; (MU2 )2∗ MU2 ),

where Comod(Ab♥ ; (MU2 )2∗ MU2 ) is the category of evenly-graded ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ MU2 )-
comodules in C2 -Mackey functors.
Theorem 6.4. Given any X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T and n, k ∈ Z, there is an isomorphism
                      (π C−♥ X)n ∼
                               k = (MGL2 )         (X).
                                                     n+k,n,n

Recollection 6.5. In Theorem 5.1, we constructed a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                 Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) ' Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ).
Moreover, in Lemma 5.16 we equipped Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ) with a t-
structure whose heart is identified with Comod(Ab♥ ; (MU2 )2∗ MU2 ). We call the in-
duced t-structure on Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) the tensor t-structure and write Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t)⊗−♥
for the heart.
  26In the time since the first version of this work was posted, the theorems of Bachmann–Kong–
Wang–Xu appeared in [BKWX22]
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                         45


  To prove Theorem 6.3, it will suffice to prove the following:
Proposition 6.6. The tensor t-structure on Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) is induced by the Chow
t-structure on SH(R)Ai2T : a C t-module X is tensor (co)connective if and only if its
underlying Artin-Tate R-motivic spectrum is Chow (co)connective.
   Moreover, the induced symmetric monoidal functor
                        Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t)⊗−♥ → SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥
is an equivalence of categories.
  First, we need a lemma:
Lemma 6.7. We have C t ∈ SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ and the unit map S0,0,0
                                                         2     → C t induces an
equivalence π0C−♥ S20,0,0 ' C t.
Proof. First, we note that S0,0,−1
                            2      ≥ 1 in the Chow t-structure. Since
                              S0,0,−1
                               2      ' Σ S0,1,0
                                           2     ⊗ S2−1,−1,−1 ,
it suffices to show that S0,1,0
                           2    ≥ 0. This follows immediately from the cofiber sequence
                   0,0,0
Σ∞+ Spec(C)2 → S2        → S0,1,0
                             2    .
                                                              t
   Combining this fact with the cofiber sequence S20,0,−1 −    → S20,0,0 → C t, we find that
C t ≥ 0 and that S0,0,0
                     2    → C t induces an equivalence on π0C−♥ .
   To conclude, it suffices to show that C t ≤ 0. By definition, we must show that
πn+k
 R
     1 ,n+k2 ,n
                C t = 0 for all n, k1 , k2 satisfying k1 > 0 and k1 + k2 > 0. This follows
directly from Theorem 10.1(2).                                                            
  We note down the following corollary for later use:
Corollary 6.8. Suppose that X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T is a filtered colimit of Artin-Tate R-motivic
spectra that each admit a finite cell structure with all cells of the form Sn,n,n
                                                                            2     . Then
X ⊗ C t ∈ SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ and X → X ⊗ C t induces an equivalence π0C−♥ X → X ⊗ C t.
Proof. It is clear that the collection of X which satisfy the conclusions of the corollary
is closed under filtered colimits and extensions, so it suffices to assume that X ' Sn,n,n
                                                                                     2
Since Σn,n,n is an automorphism of the Chow t-structure, we may reduce to the case of
X ' S20,0,0 , which is precisely Lemma 6.7.                                             
Proof of Proposition 6.6. We first show that the tensor t-structure is induced by the
Chow t-structure. We begin by showing that the connective part of the tensor t-structure
on Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t) is generated under colimits and extensions by
                       {Σn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n C t | k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0}.
   The t-structure on IndCoh(Mfg ) has connective part generated under colimits and
                  ⊗n
extensions by ωG/M    fg
                         for n ∈ Z. On the other hand, the t-structure on Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 )
has connective part generated under colimits and extensions by Σk1 +k2 σ Z2 , where k1 ≥ 0
and k1 + k2 ≥ 0.
   By definition, it follows that the connective part of the induced t-structure on Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; Z2 )⊗Z
IndCoh(Mfg ) is generated under colimits and extensions by the tensor products Σk1 +k2 σ Z2 ⊗
  ⊗n
ωG/M   fg
          , where k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0. Under the equivalence of Theorem 5.1, these
correspond to Σn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n C t, as desired.
   It follows directly from the above identification of the tensor connective category that
a C t-module is is tensor coconnective if and only if it is Chow coconnective. By Chow
connectivity of C t, which follows from Lemma 6.7, it also follows that a C t-module is
Chow connective if it is tensor connective. On the other hand, if X is Chow connective,
then X ⊗ C t is clearly tensor connective. Using the equivalence X ⊗ C t ' X ⊕ Σ1,0,−1 X
(since X is a C t-module), we see that X itself is also tensor connective.
46               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


     As a consequence of the above, we obtain a symmetric monoidal functor
                        Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t)⊗−♥ → SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ .
Since the tensor t-structure is induced by the Chow t-structure, the fact that C t lies
in the Chow heart from Lemma 6.7 implies that the above functor factors through a
symmetric monoidal equivalence
                   Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t)⊗−♥ ' Mod(SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ ; C t).
Finally, the equivalence π0C−♥ S20,0,0 ' C t of Lemma 6.7 implies that C t is the unit of
SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ , so that the forgetful functor
                        Mod(SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ ; C t) → SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥
is a symmetric monoidal equivalence.                                                   

   We now move on to the proof of Theorem 6.4. First we need to recall some basic
facts about cell structures on finite approximations of MGL.
Definition 6.9. Let Grk (An+k ) denote the Grassmannian scheme of k-planes in An+k ,
and let γ denote the tautological k-dimensional vector bundle over Grk (An+k ).
   We let MGL(n, k) denote the Thom spectrum of the virtual bundle γ − k · triv. Then
there is a canonical map MGL(n1 , k1 ) → MGL(n2 , k2 ) whenever n2 ≥ n1 and k2 ≥ n2 ,
and we have lim MGL(n, n) ' MGL.
              −→
Proposition 6.10 ([DI05]). The R-motivic spectrum MGL(n, k) admits a finite cell
structure with cells of the form Sm,m,m .
   As a consequence, MGL(n, k)2 , its Spanier-Whitehead dual D(MGL(n, k)2 ), and MGL2
are all Chow connective.
Proof. The cell structure is a consequence of [DI05]. It follows from Theorem 8.1 and
Proposition 8.2(1) that there are equivalences:
                         MGL(n, k) ⊗ S2 ' MGL(n, k)2
                         D(MGL(n, k)) ⊗ S2 ' D(MGL(n, k)2 )
                         MGL ⊗ S2 ' MGL2 .
Therefore these spectra continue to have the same cell structure after 2-completion, from
which the statements about Chow connectivity follow immediately.                        

Proposition 6.11. The map MGL2 → MGL2 ⊗C t induces an equivalence π0C−♥ MGL2 '
MGL2 ⊗ C t, and the corresponding (MU2 )2∗ MU2 -comodule is (MU2 )2∗ MU2 .
Proof. The first part of the statement follows directly from Corollary 6.8 and Propo-
sition 6.10. On the other hand, Corollary 4.18 states that MGL2 ' Γ∗ (MUR,2 ), so
that Theorem 5.6 and Proposition 6.6 together imply that MGL2 ⊗ C t coreponds to
                      ∼
πC∗ρ (MUR,2 ⊗ MUR,2 ) = (MU2 )2∗ MU2 .                                             
   2




Notation 6.12. We let ⊗♥ denote the symmetric monoidal structure on SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ '
Comod(Ab♥ 2 ; (MU2 )2∗ MU2 ).
  Given a graded (MU2 )2∗ MU2 -comodule M∗ , we let M [n]∗ denote the shift with
M [n]k+n = Mk .
Lemma 6.13. Let M∗ be a graded (MU2 )2∗ MU2 -comodule in C2 -Mackey functors,
viewed as a element of SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ . Then M∗ ⊗ MGL2 lies in SH(R)Ai2T,C−♥ and
corresponds to M∗ ⊗♥ (MU2 )2∗ MU2 .
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                            47


Proof. It follows from Proposition 6.10 that M∗ ⊗ MGL2 is Chow connective. As a
consequence, Proposition 6.11 implies that there are equivalences
                       π0C−♥ (M∗ ⊗ MGL2 ) ' M∗ ⊗♥ π0C−♥ MGL2
                                               ' M∗ ⊗♥ (MU2 )2∗ MU2 .
  It therefore suffices to show that M∗ ⊗ MGL2 is Chow coconnective. For this, we
compute for n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z with k1 > 0 and k1 + k2 > 0:
      R
     πn+k 1 ,n+k2 ,n
                     (M∗ ⊗ MGL2 ) ∼   n+k ,n+k2 ,n
                                  = [S2 1          , M∗ ⊗ MGL2 ]SH(R)Ai2T
                                   ∼
                                   = lim[Sn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n , M∗ ⊗ MGL(m, m)2 ]SH(R)Ai2T
                                     −→ 2
                                   ∼
                                   = lim[Sn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n ⊗D(MGL(m, m)2 ), M∗ ]SH(R)Ai2T
                                     −→ 2
                                   ∼0
                                   =
since D(MGL(m, m)2 ) is Chow connective by Proposition 6.10. It follows that M∗ ⊗
MGL2 is Chow coconnective, as desired.                                          

Lemma 6.14. Suppose that X is Chow connective. Then the map X ⊗ MGL2 →
π0C−♥ (X) ⊗ MGL2 induces an equivalence on π R
                                             n−k1 ,n−k2 ,n for all n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z with
k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0.
Proof. It suffices to show that π R   n−k1 ,n−k2 ,n Y ⊗ MGL2 = 0 for all Chow 1-connective
Y . Since this condition is closed under filtered colimits, suspensions and extensions, it
is closed under all colimits and extensions. It therefore suffices to assume that Y =
Sm+a
  2
      1 ,m+a2 ,m
                 for m, a1 , a2 ∈ Z satisfying a1 > 0 and a1 + a2 > 0. In other words,
we must show that π R   n−k1 ,n−k2 ,n MGL2 for all n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z now satisfying k1 > 0 and
k1 + k2 > 0.
    By Proposition 4.14, there is an isomorphism π R                      ∼ C2
                                                       n−k1 ,n−k2 ,n MGL2 = π n−k1 +(n−k2 )σ P2n MUR,2 .
                           n−k +(n−k2 )σ                                                  n−k1 +(n−k2 )σ
This is zero because Φe (S2 1              ) ' S22n−k1 −k2 is of dimension < 2n and ΦC2 (S2                )'
Sn−k
 2
     1
       is of dimension < n.                                                                   

Proof of Theorem 6.4. We have
      π0C−♥ (X)n ∼
                 = Hom(MU2 )2∗ −mod ((MU2 )2∗ [n], π0C−♥ (X))
                  ∼
                  = Hom(MU2 )2∗ MU2 −comod ((MU2 )2∗ , π0C−♥ (X) ⊗♥ (MU2 )2∗ MU2 )
                  ∼
                  = πC
                                    n,n,n
                                          , π0C−♥ (X) ⊗ MGL2 )
                     0 MapSH(R)AT (S2
                       2
                               i2

                  ∼
                  = πC
                                    n,n,n
                                          , X ⊗ MGL2 )
                     0 MapSH(R)AT (S2
                       2
                               i2

                  ∼        R
                  = (MGL2 )n+k,n,n (X),
where the third and fourth isomorphisms follow from Lemma 6.13 and Lemma 6.14,
respectively.                                                               

   Finally, we record the following proposition for use in Section 6.2.
Proposition 6.15. An Artin-Tate R-motivic spectrum X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T is left complete
with respect to the Chow t-structure if and only if it is MGL2 -local.
   The proof will make use of the following lemma:
Lemma 6.16. The functors X 7→ π R
                                n+k,n,n X are jointly conservative on SH(R)i2 .
                                                                           AT



Proof. Since the functors X 7→ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Sn,n,n
                                              2     , X) are jointly conservative, it suffices
to note that the functors Y 7→ π C
                                 k Y are jointly conservative on SpC2 .
                                  2
                                                                                              
48               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Proof of Proposition 6.15. Since the Chow t-structure is right complete, it is equivalent
to show that X ⊗ MGL2 ' 0 if and only if πnC−♥ X = 0 for all n. This is an immediate
consequence of Theorem 6.4 and Lemma 6.16.                                             
6.2. The functor νR .
   In this section, we will study the functor defined below:
Definition 6.17. We define a lax symmetric monoidal functor
                                   νR : SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T
to be the composite
                                                                C
                            Be−1                               τ≥0
                   SpC2 ,i2 −−−→ Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [t−1 ]) −−→ SH(R)Ai2T .
   One of the main results of this section is the following theorem, which summarizes
the basic properties of νR :
Theorem 6.18. Let X, Y, Z ∈ SpC2 ,i2 . The lax symmetric monoidal functor νR :
SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T satisfies the following properties:
   (1) There is a natural equivalence Be(νR (X)) ' X.
   (2) The functor X 7→ νR (X) commutes with filtered colimits.
   (3) Given any k ∈ Z, there is a natural equivalence νR (Σkρ X) ' Σk,k,k νR (X).
   (4) Suppose that X → Y → Z is a cofiber sequence. Then
                                   νR (X) → νR (Y ) → νR (Z)
         is a cofiber sequence if and only if π C                      C2
                                                nρ−1 (X ⊗ MUR,2 ) → π nρ−1 (Y ⊗ MUR,2 ) is
                                                  2


         a monomorphism for all n.
     (5) Suppose that X is a filtered colimit of C2 -spectra that admit finite cell structures
         with all cells of the form Snρ
                                     2 for n ∈ Z. Then, for all Y , the natural map

                               νR (X) ⊗ νR (Y ) → νR (X ⊗ Y )
         is an equivalence.
     (6) The C2 -spectrum X is MUR,2 -local if and only if νR (X) is MGL2 -local.
   We also compare νR to the functor Γ∗ : SpC2 ,i2 → SH(R)Ai2T constructed in Construc-
tion 4.4.
Theorem 6.19. For X ∈ SpC2 ,i2 , there is a natural equivalence
                                    Γ∗ (X) ' νR (X)∧
                                                   MGL2 .

   As evidence that the functor νR is a good way to produce Artin-Tate R-motivic
spectra, we prove that several R-motivic spectra of interest may be recovered from their
Betti realizations via νR :
Theorem 6.20. There are natural equivalences of commutative rings in SH(R)Ai2T :
                                     MGL2 ' νR (MUR,2 )
                                       MF2 ' νR (F2 )
                                       MZ2 ' νR (Z2 )
                                       kgl2 ' νR (kuR,2 )
                                        kq2 ' νR (koC2 ,2 ).
Remark 6.21. In light of Theorem 6.20, it would be reasonable to define an R-motivic
spectrum of motivic modular forms as νR (tmf C2 ,2 ), assuming that one had a suitable
C2 -equivariant spectrum of connective topological modular forms tmf C2 ,2 . Since no such
equivariant spectrum has yet been constructed, we leave this to future work.
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                         49


Remark 6.22. Since all of the Artin-Tate R-motivic spectra in question are MGL2 -
complete, in light of Theorem 6.19 we may replace νR in Theorem 6.20 by Γ∗ .
  We now begin with the proof of Theorem 6.18.

Proof of Theorem 6.18.
   Proof of (1): Equivalently, we are to show that νR (X)[t−1 ] ' Be−1 (X). Using
the cofiber sequence νR (X) → Be−1 (X) → τ≤−1      C
                                                      (Be−1 (X)), we find that the cofiber of
                    −1                −1
νR (X)[t−1 ] → Be (X)[t−1 ] ' Be (X) is may be expressed as lim Σ0,0,m τ≤−1        C
                                                                                       (Be−1 (X)).
                                                                      − →
   Now, we know that πn+k    R
                                1 ,n+k2 ,n
                                             C
                                           (τ≤−1 (Be−1 (X))) ∼= 0 for all n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z with
k1 > 0 and k1 + k2 > 0. It follows that πn+k1 ,n+k2 ,n (Σ
                                               R
                                                                   τ≤−1 (Be−1 (X))) ∼
                                                             0,0,m C
                                                                                      = 0 for all
n, k1 , k2 ∈ Z with k1 > −m and k1 +k2 > −2m. This implies that lim Σ0,0,m τ≤−1     C
                                                                                        (Be−1 (X))
                                                                        −→
is null, as desired.
   Proof of (2): This is immediate from the fact that the Chow t-structure is compat-
ible with filtered colimits.
   Proof of (3): It is clear that there is a natural equivalence Be−1 (Σkρ X) ' Σk,k,k Be−1 (X).
Moreover, since Σm,m,m induces an automorphism of the Chow t-structure, we find fur-
ther that τ≥0 C
                 commutes with Σm,m,m . Combining these facts, we obtain the desired
result.
   Proof of (4): It is clear that X → Y → Z is a cofiber sequence if and only if
Be−1 (X) → Be−1 (Y ) → Be−1 (Z) is. Applying a general fact about t-strutures, we see
that
                       C
                     τ≥0 (Be−1 (X)) → τ≥0   C
                                              (Be−1 (Y )) → τ≥0
                                                              C
                                                                 (Be−1 (Z))
is a cofiber sequence if and only if π−1 C−♥
                                             (Be−1 (X)) → π−1C−♥
                                                                 (Be−1 (Y )) is a monomor-
phism. The result then follows from Theorem 6.4 and the isomorphism π R       p,q,w (MGL2 ⊗
   −1       ∼    C2
Be (X)) = π p+qσ (MUR,2 ⊗X).
   Proof of (5): By compatibility with filtered colimits, we may assume that X admits
a finite cell structure with all cells of the form Snρ
                                                    2 . Let us write

                           Sn2 1 ρ ' X1 → X2 → · · · → Xk = X
with Xi /Xi−1 ' Sn2 i ρ . Then it is easy to prove that π C
                                                          nρ−1 (Xi ⊗ MUR,2 ) = 0 for all n
                                                           2


and i by induction, so that by (3) and (4) there are cofiber sequences
                             νR (Xi−1 ) → νR (Xi ) → S2ni ,ni ,ni .
   It follows that D(νR (X)) is Chow connective. To show that the natural map νR (X) ⊗
νR (Y ) → νR (X ⊗ Y ) is an equivalence, it suffices to show that it induces an equivalence
on Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z, −) for all Chow connective Z. For such Z, we have
   Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z, νR (X) ⊗ νR (Y )) ' Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z ⊗ D(νR (X)), νR (Y ))
                                           ' Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z ⊗ D(νR (X)), Be−1 (Y ))
                                           ' Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z, νR (X) ⊗ Be−1 (Y ))
                                           ' Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z, Be−1 (X) ⊗ Be−1 (Y ))
                                           ' Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Z, νR (X ⊗ Y )),
as desired. We have used Chow connectivity of D(νR (X)) in the second equivalence and
(1) in the fourth.
   Proof of (6): It is clear that X is MUR,2 -local if and only Be−1 (X) is MGL2 -local.
By Proposition 6.15, it suffices to show that Be−1 (X) is left complete with respect to
the Chow t-structure if and only if νR (X) = τ≥0 C
                                                   (Be−1 (X)) is. This follows from the
fact that left completeness is invariant under taking connective cover.               
50               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   We now move on to the proof of Theorem 6.19. We begin by studying the interaction
of the Chow t-structure with MGL2 .
Proposition 6.23. Let X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T . Then the following statements hold:
   (1) If X is Chow connective, then
                              MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,n , MGL2 ⊗ X)
         is regular slice 2n-connective for all n.
     (2) There is a natural equivalence
                                    C        C
                           MGL2 ⊗ (τ≥0 X) ' τ≥0 (MGL2 ⊗ X).
     (3) The natural map
         MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                        2
                                        C
                              , MGL2 ⊗ τ≥0 X) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                               2     , MGL2 ⊗ X)
                                C
         induced by the counit τ≥0 X → X is equivalent to the canonical map
         P2n MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                            2     , MGL2 ⊗ X) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                               2     , MGL2 ⊗ X).
Proof. We begin with the proof of (1). Since the full subcategory of X for which
MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
               2     , MGL2 ⊗ X) is regular slice 2n-connective is closed under colimits
and extensions, it suffices to prove this for X = S2m+k1 ,m+k2 ,m for all m, k1 , k2 ∈ Z
where k1 ≥ 0 and k1 + k2 ≥ 0.
  Now, we have
MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
               2     , MGL2 ⊗Sm+k
                              2
                                 1 ,m+k2 ,m
                                            ) ' Σm+k1 +(m+k2 )σ MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,n−m , MGL2 ).
Since Σm+k1 +(m+k2 )σ of a regular slice 2(n − m)-connective C2 -spectrum is regular slice
2n-connective, this reduces us to the case where X = S20,0,0 , where this follows from
Proposition 4.14.
   We now prove (2). Since MGL2 is Chow connective, there is a natural map
                             C               C
                           (τ≥0 X) ⊗ MGL2 → τ≥0 (X ⊗ MGL2 ).
To show that this is an equivalence, it suffices to show that
      Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y, (τ≥0
                            C
                               X) ⊗ MGL2 ) → Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y, τ≥0
                                                                  C
                                                                     (X ⊗ MGL2 ))
is an equivalence for all Y compact and Chow connective. This is equivalent to the map
        Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y, (τ≥0
                              C
                                 X) ⊗ MGL2 ) → Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y, X ⊗ MGL2 ).
Now, using compactness of Y , the identification MGL2 ' limk MGL(k, k)2 , and duality,
                                                        −→
we may rewrite this map as
lim Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y ⊗D(MGL(k, k)2 ), (τ≥0
                                          C
                                             X)) → lim Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Y ⊗D(MGL(k, k)2 ), X).
−→                                                 −→
 k                                                      k
This is an equivalence by Proposition 6.10.
  Finally, we prove (3). By (1), the map
         MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                        2
                                        C
                              , MGL2 ⊗ τ≥0 X) → MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                               2     , MGL2 ⊗ X)
factors through a map
       MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                      2
                                      C
                            , MGL2 ⊗ τ≥0 X) → P2n MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                                 2     , MGL2 ⊗ X).
   Since both sides are regular slice 2n-connective, it suffices to show that this map
is an equivalence after applying Ω∞ Σ−nρ . Making some basic manipulations, this is
equivalent to showing that
     Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Sn,n,n
                       2
                                       C
                             , MGL2 ⊗ τ≥0 X) → Ω∞ MapSH(R)Ai2T (Sn,n,n
                                                                 2     , MGL2 ⊗ X)
is an equivalence. This is equivalence by (2) and the Chow connectivity of Sn,n,n
                                                                            2     .       
                 GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                  51


   We are now ready to prove Theorem 6.19.

Proof of Theorem 6.19. In this proof, we freely use the notation of Section 4 and Ap-
pendix C.2, in particular the functors i∗ , τ≥0
                                             2slice
                                                    , and cb.
  Let X be a C2 -spectrum. By Proposition 6.23(2), there are equivalences
                                           •
                           νR (X)∧
                                 MGL2 ' Tot (νR (X) ⊗ cb(MGL2 ))
                                       ' Tot• (νR (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 ))).
Applying i∗ to the map νR (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 )) → Be−1 (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 )) of cb(MGL2 )-
modules in cosimplicial Artin-Tate R-motivic spectra, we obtain a map
                          i∗ (νR (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 ))) → X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 )
of i∗ (cb(MGL2 )) ' τ≥0
                     2slice
                            cb(MUR,2 )-modules in cosimplicial filtered C2 -spectra, where
the target is constant in the filtered direction.
   By Proposition 6.23(3), this factors through an equivalence
                                               ∼  2slice
                      i∗ (νR (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 ))) −
                                               → τ≥0     (X ⊗ cb(MUR,2 ))
of τ≥0
    2slice
           cb(MUR,2 )-modules. Totalizing, we obtain an equivalence
                                 i∗ (νR (X)∧
                                           MGL2 ) ' i∗ (Γ∗ (X))

of R• -modules. Finally, translating back along the equivalence i∗ , we obtain the desired
equivalence
                                   νR (X)∧
                                         MGL2 ' Γ∗ (X)
in SH(R)Ai2T .                                                                          

   We now move on to the proof of Theorem 6.20. We will prove Theorem 6.20 as
an application of a general criterion for there to be an MGL2 -local equivalence X '
νR (Be(X)). This will be based on the following definition:
Definition 6.24. We say that X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T is slice simple if, for all n ∈ Z, the natural
map
                         MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,n , X) → Be(X)
factors through an equivalence
                             MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,n , X) ' P2n Be(X).

Proposition 6.25. Let X ∈ SH(R)AT , and let LMGL2 denote MGL2 -localization. Then
LMGL2 X ' LMGL2 νR (Be(X)) if and only if MGL2 ⊗ X is slice simple.
  If X is a commutative algebra, then the equivalence LMGL2 X ' LMGL2 νR (Be(X)) is
one of commutative algebras.
Proof. Suppose that LMGL2 X ' LMGL2 νR (Be(X)), so that MGL2 ⊗ X ' MGL2 ⊗
νR (Be(X)). Then we have
       MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                      2     , MGL2 ⊗ X) ' MapSH(R)Ai2T (S20,0,n , MGL2 ⊗ νR (Be(X))
as C2 -spectra over Be(X). By Proposition 6.23(3), the map
                  MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                 2     , MGL2 ⊗ νR (Be(X)) → Be(MGL2 ⊗ X)
factors through an equivalence
                 MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                2     , MGL2 ⊗ νR (Be(X)) ' P2n Be(MGL2 ⊗ X),
so that MGL2 ⊗ X is slice simple.
   Now suppose that MGL2 ⊗ X is slice simple, and consider the following diagram:
52               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                                X             X[t−1 ]


                               C
                              τ≥0 X         C
                                           τ≥0 (X[t−1 ]).

If X is a commutative algebra, then this is a diagram of commutative algebras. Applying
MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
               2     , − ⊗ MGL2 ), we obtain the diagram:


     MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                    2     , X ⊗ MGL2 )                        Be(X) ⊗ MUR,2


 MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                2
                          C
                      , (τ≥0 X) ⊗ MGL2 )       MapSH(R)Ai2T (S0,0,n
                                                              2
                                                                        C
                                                                    , (τ≥0 (X[t−1 ])) ⊗ MGL2 ).

Finally, applying Proposition 6.23(3) and slice simplicity of MGL2 ⊗ X, we may identify
this diagram with

                 P2n (Be(X) ⊗ MUR,2 )            Be(X) ⊗ MUR,2


                 P2n (Be(X) ⊗ MUR,2 )         P2n (Be(X) ⊗ MUR,2 ).

In conclusion, we find that the maps τ≥0
                                      C
                                         X → X and τ≥0
                                                    C       C
                                                       X → τ≥0 (X[t−1 ]) ' νR (Be(X))
are MGL2 -equivalences, as desired.                                                
   To prove Theorem 6.20, we now need to show that the R-motivic spectra in question
are slice simple after being tensored with MGL2 . To this end, we record the following
simple proposition:
Proposition 6.26. The collection of slice simple Artin-Tate R-motivic spectra is closed
under direct sums, retracts, and pure suspensions Σn,n,n .
Proof of Theorem 6.20. By Proposition 6.25, it suffices to show that MGL2 ⊗ E is slice
simple for E = MGL2 , MF2 , MZ2 , kgl2 , kq2 . Indeed, each of these E is MGL2 -local, and
νR (Be(E)) is also MGL2 -local by Theorem 6.18(6), since Be(E) is MUR,2 -local.
   Now, for E = MGL2 , MF2 , MZ2 , kgl2 , MGL2 ⊗ E is a direct sum of pure suspensions
of E, so it suffices to show that E itself is slice simple. For MGL2 , this follows from
Proposition 4.14. For MZ2 and MF2 , it follows from Lemma 3.10. For kgl2 , it follows
from Proposition 4.8 and [Hea19, Theorem 1.1].
   Finally, for the case of kq2 , we use the equivalence kq2 ⊗ Cη ' kgl2 and the fact that
η = 0 in π0,1,1
           R
                MGL2 to deduce that MGL2 ⊗ kgl2 ' MGL2 ⊗ kq2 ⊗ Cη ' MGL2 ⊗ kq2 ⊕
Σ 1,1,1
        MGL2 ⊗ kq2 . It follows that MGL2 ⊗ kq2 is a retract of MGL2 ⊗ kgl2 , so that
MGL2 ⊗ kq2 is slice simple.                                                              

                               7. The a-local category
   In this section, we study the a-localized category, Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]). The au-
thors find this category to be the most enduring mystery in our study of Artin–Tate
motivic spectra over R. Some of the behavior of this category is the subject of Ques-
tion 7.5 and Question 7.7.
                                                                          C2
   In the category of C2 -equivariant spectra, inverting the class aσ ∈ π−σ  S corresponds
to taking geometric fixed points. As a consequence, since a = cC/R (aσ ), we may interpret
Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) as the natural target for some kind of “motivic geometric fixed
points” operation. Using t, we may also view the category Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) as
a deformation of Spi2 with algebraic special fiber. Since ΦC2 MUR,2 ' MO, one might
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                  53


imagine that this degeneration is related to SynMO ' SynF2 . In Proposition 7.6, we will
construct a comparison functor between Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) and SynF2 . However,
it is not an equivalence.
    Another feature of the equivariant setting is the existence of the diagram,
                                                SpC2
                                      NmC
                                        e
                                          2
                                                            ΦC2

                                                  Id
                                    Sp                            Sp .
This suggests we study the composite NmR   C (−)[a
                                                  −1
                                                     ]. Although the norm functor itself is
not exact, in Lemma 7.3 we observe that this composite preserves all colimits. However,
it is not an equivalence.
    Altogether, we conclude that the a-local category sits between the even BP-synthetic
category and the F2 -synthetic category in a nontrivial way. In fact, although we are
able to identify the three algebraic categories which arise as the special fibers, the maps
between them are surprisingly nontrival.

7.1. The a-local category as a deformation.
   The symmetric monoidal category Mod(SH(R); S[a−1 , t−1 ]) is equivalent to Sp by
[Bac18] and Corollary 3.6. As a consequence, there is an equivalence 27
                              Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 , t−1 ]) ' Spi2 .
On the other hand, the following is an immediate corollary of Theorem 5.1.
Corollary 7.1. There is an equivalence of symmetric monoidal categories
              Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t[a−1 ]) ' Mod(Spi2 ; ΦC2 Z2 ) ⊗Z IndCoh(Mfg ).
On homotopy groups, this induces an isomorphism 28
                             M                                              
         R
        πp,q,w (C t[a−1 ]) ∼
                           =         F2 {u2b } ⊗F2 Exts,2w
                                                      BP∗ BP (BP ∗ , BP∗ /2)   .
                                 w+2b−s=p

Recollection 7.2. There is an isomorphism π∗ ΦC2 Z2 ∼     = F2 [y], where |y| = 2. Viewing
                                                    u2σ
ΦC2 Z2 as Z2 [a−1
               σ  ], y may be identified with u2σ
                                              a2  = a2  .
                                                       σ      σ


   The presence of the non-nilpotent element u in the homotopy of C t[a−1 ] prevents
this category from being equivalent to either a BP-synthetic category or an F2 -synthetic
category.
   The simplest way to gain computational access to the a-local category seems to be
the t-Bockstein spectral sequence.

7.2. The a-local norm.
   Equivariantly, the composition of the norm functor with geometric fixed points is the
identity. As we shall see, over R the situation is not so straightforward.
Lemma 7.3. The composite
                              NmR               (−)[a−1 ]
                 SH(C)Ai2T −−−→
                              C
                                SH(R)Ai2T −−−−−→ Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ])
is a symmetric monoidal left adjoint. On Picard elements this composite sends Ss,w
                                                                               2   to
  s,∗,2w −1                         2
S2      [a ]. The map τ is sent to t .
    27Of course, this can also be deduced directly from Theorem 3.2 and the equivalence
Mod(SpC2 ,i2 ; S2 [a−1
                    σ ]) ' Spi2 .
    28Since |a| = (0, −1, 0), the trigraded homotopy groups of an a-local R-motivic spectrum are periodic
in the q degree. This is reflected by the fact that the given formula has no dependence on q.
54              ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Proof. The norm functor NmR     C is symmetric monoidal and commutes with sifted colimits
[BH20b, Proposition 4.5]. Since we compose it with a symmetric monoidal left adjoint,
in order to prove the first claim we need only show the composite preserves binary sums.
From [BH20b, Corollary 5.13], we have a formula
                   NmR              R                       R
                     C (X ⊕ Y ) ' NmC (X) ⊕ i∗ (X ⊗ Y ) ⊕ NmC (Y ),

where i is the inclusion R → C. Since the functor i∗ lands in modules over the cofiber
of a, the middle term vanishes upon inverting a, as desired. The claim about Picard
elements is just a restatement of what we already know about Picard elements from
Recollection 1.29.
   Now we examine NmR    C (τ ) ∈ π0,0,−2 S2 . Since the invert t map
                                   R

                           R
                          π0,0,−2 S2 → π0,0,−2
                                        R
                                               S2 [t−1 ] ∼  C2
                                                         = π0,0 S2
is an isomorphism which sends t to 1, it suffices to note that
                              −1
                    NmR
                      C (τ )[t   ] = NmC
                                       e ((τ )[τ
                                        2        −1
                                                    ]) = NmC
                                                           e (1) = 1.
                                                            2
                                                                                           

Remark 7.4. Despite the fact that upon inverting t the functor NmR       C [a
                                                                             −1
                                                                                ] becomes
the identity on Spi2 , for degree reasons the class η in π1,1 S2 cannot map to the class
                                                          C

1 ⊗ α1 in the homotopy of C t[a−1 ] which one might expect detects η.
Question 7.5. Is there an equivalence NmR C (Cτ ) ' C t of commutative algebras?
                                                       2

Postcomposing with the quotient map C t2 → C t, one obtains functors
     Mod(SH(C)AipT ; Cτ ) → Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t2 [a−1 ]) → Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; C t[a−1 ]).
Can the composite functor above be identified with the composite functor below?
              IndCoh(Mfg )i2                Mod(Ab; ΦC2 Z2 ) ⊗Z2 IndCoh(Mfg )i2
                       F2 ⊗−
                                       Frobenius
        VectF2 ⊗Z2 IndCoh(Mfg )i2                  VectF2 ⊗Z2 IndCoh(Mfg )i2

7.3. Mapping down to F2 -synthetic spectra.
   In this section, we will construct a realization functor from the a-local category to
the category of F2 -synthetic spectra. In some ways, this functor is even more surprising
than the norm functor. While the norm functor seems to double degrees on the special
fiber, Question 7.7 suggests that inverting a cuts degrees in half.
Proposition 7.6. There is a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                       ReF2 : Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) → SynF2 ,iτ ,
which sends Sp,q,w
             2     to Sp,w
                       τ   and t to τ .
Proof. We begin by noting that under the equivalence SH(R)Ai2T ' Mod(SpFil    C2 ,i2 ; R• ) '
Mod(SpFil
       C2 ; R• ) from  Theorem 4.3, inverting a becomes  levelwise geometric fixed    points.
Thus, Mod(SH(R)i2 ; S2 [a ]) is equivalent to modules over the commutative algebra
                    AT     −1

ΦC2 R• obtained by applying ΦC2 levelwise. Now recall that
                                                       
                               R• := Tot∗ P2• MU∗+1 R,2   .

We may then construct a chain of comparison maps
                                                                     
                   '
           ΦC2 R• −→ ΦC2 Tot∗ P2• MU∗+1 R,2   → Tot∗ C2
                                                      Φ   P 2• MU   ∗+1
                                                                    R,2
                                           
                         ∗        C2   ∗+1    '     ∗         ∗+1
                                                                  
                   → Tot τ≥• Φ MUR,2 −        → Tot τ≥• MO          ,
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                         55


where the key step is a use of the fact that the geometric fixed points of a regular slice
2n-connective C2 -spectrum are n-connective. This is used to produce the map across
the line-break.
   In Proposition C.22, we produced a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                                                   
                     Mod SpFil ; Tot∗ τ≥• MO∗+1 ' Syncell    MO,iτ .

Since the category of MO-finite-projective spectra is equivalent to the category of F2 -
finite-projective spectra, and a map X → Y of spectra is an MO∗ -surjection if and only
if it’s an (F2 )∗ -surjection, there is a symmetric monoidal equivalence SynMO ' SynF2 .
Finally, we can use the fact that Syncell  F2 ' SynF2 to drop the decoration. Altogether,
base-change along this ring map produces a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
                              Mod(SH(R)Ai2T ; S2 [a−1 ]) → SynF2 ,iτ .                      
   Much of what was said in this section can be summarized with the existence of the
following diagram of symmetric monoidal left adjoints:
                             Id                                     Id
       Spi2                                       Spi2                            Spi2
          (−)[τ −1 ]                                 (−)[t−1 ]             (−)[τ −1 ]

    SH(C)Ai2T                      −1
                                                SH(R)Ai2T           ReF2
                                                                                SynF2 ,iτ
                       (NmR
                          C (−))[a    ]
          −⊗Cτ                                       −⊗C t                   −⊗Cτ

                                           C2
 IndCoh(Mfg )i2             Mod(Ab; Φ           Z2 ) ⊗Z2 IndCoh(Mfg )i2    Mod(SynF2 ; Cτ ).
   The bottom right corner can be described in terms of comodules over the dual Steen-
rod algebra [Pst18, Section 4.5]. The maps from the left to the right are comparison
maps from the Adams–Novikov to the Adams spectral sequence.
Question 7.7. Is the map from the bottom middle to the bottom right induced by the
map of Hopf algebroids (BP∗ , BP∗ BP) → (F2 , A) which sends ti to ζi ? Note that this
map is not the usual Thom reduction map that sends ti to ζi2 .

                                           8. Completions
   In this paper correctly handling a variety of different types of completion has been a
key point. The purpose of this section is to give a single uniform source of information
on completeness questions and how we handle them.
   In Section 8.1, we show that 2-completion agrees with tensoring with S2 for some
important R-motivic spectra. Since these R-motivic spectra are cellular, this implies
that their 2-completions in SH(R) lie in SH(R)Ai2T and that that their cell decompositions
carry over unchanged to the 2-completion. In the case of MGL, this is an important
technical point in the rest of the paper.
   In Section 8.2, we record the fact that every dualizable object of SH(R)Ai2T is t-
complete.
   Finally, in Section 8.3, we make some remarks about a-completion.
8.1. 2 completion is sometimes i2 completion.
   The main goal of this section is to prove the following theorem:
Theorem 8.1. There are natural equivalences in SH(R):
                                          MGL ⊗ S2 → MGL2
                                          HZ ⊗ S2 → HZ2
                                          kgl ⊗ S2 → kgl2
                                          kq ⊗ S2 → kq2 .
56               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   The proof for MGL, HZ and kgl will be completely independent of the rest of this
paper. On the other hand, the proof for kq will use results from Sections 2 through 4.
   We begin with some basic facts about the situation. In the following, we will make
use of the homotopy t-structure on the category of SH(R) of R-motivic spectra. We
refer to the reader to [Hoy15, §2.1] for basic facts about the homotopy t-structure.
Proposition 8.2. Given X ∈ SH(R), the following statements are true:
   (1) If X is dualizable, then
                                X ⊗ S2 → X2
          is an equivalence.
      (2) Suppose that lim X(n) ' X and that the connectivity of the maps X(n) → X
                         −→
          tend to infinity with respect to the homotopy t-structure. Then if
                                     X(n) ⊗ S2 → X(n)2
          is an equivalence for all n, we also learn that
                                          X ⊗ S2 → X2
          is an equivalence.
Proof. To prove (1), it simply suffices to note that since X is dualizable, the functor
− ⊗ X preserves limits.
   To prove (2), we note that, since tensoring with S2 preserves colimits, it is equivalent
to show that
                                     lim X(n)2 → X2
                                     −→
is an equivalence, i.e. that
                         lim(X2 /X(n)2 ) ' lim(X/X(n))2 ' 0.
                         −→                −→
             p,w,w
  Since {S       ⊗S+ |S ∈ Sm/R and p, w ∈ Z} forms a set of compact generators for
SH(R), it suffices to show that
                                                                             
  MapSH(R) (Sp,w,w ⊗S+ , lim(X/X(n))2 ) ' lim MapSH(R) (Sp,w,w ⊗S+ , X/X(n))2
                           −→                −→
is equivalent to 0 for all S ∈ Sm/R and p, w ∈ Z.
   This follows from the definition of the homotopy t-structure, which implies that, for
fixed S ∈ Sm/R and p, w ∈ Z, the connectivity of the spectrum
                               MapSH(R) (Sp,w,w ⊗S+ , X/X(n))
goes to infinity as n goes to infinity.                                                  
     The key input to our proof of Theorem 8.1 will be the following:
Lemma 8.3. Let MGL(n, k) denote the Thom spectrum of the bundle γ − k · triv over
Grk (An+k ). Then the cofiber of the natural map MGL(n, n) → MGL is n-connective
with respect to the homotopy t-structure.
Proof. This is an immediate consequence of [Hoy15, Lemma 3.4].                           
Proof of Theorem 8.1 for MGL, HZ and kgl. Since MGL(n, k) is dualizable, the result
for MGL follows from the combination of Proposition 8.2(1,2) with Lemma 8.3.
   We now turn to the case of HZ. By the Hopkins–Morel theorem [Hoy15], there is an
equivalence
                               MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . ) ' HZ
for certain classes ai ∈ πi,i,i
                          R
                                MGL. In other words,
                               lim MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ) ' HZ.
                               −→
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                  57


By the result for MGL, we know that the result holds for all MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ). By
Proposition 8.2(2), it therefore suffices to show that the connectivity of
                       MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ) → MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . ) ' HZ
goes to infinity. To do this, it suffices to show that the connectivity of
                     MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ) → MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak , ak+1 )
goes to infinity, which follows from the cofiber sequences
MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ) → MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak , ak+1 ) → Σk+2,k+1,k+1 MGL/(a1 , a2 , . . . , ak ).
   Finally, we handle the case of kgl. Combining the Hopkins–Morel theorem and con-
vergence of the effective slice towers for MGL and kgl [Hoy15, Lemmas 8.10 and 8.11]
with [Spi10, Proposition 5.4], we find that there is an equivalence
                                     MGL/(a2 , a3 , . . . ) ' kgl.
We may therefore prove the result for kgl exactly as we did for HZ.                                   
   Before we move on to the case of kq, we collect some facts that we will need:
Proposition 8.4. The following are true:
   (1) Suppose that X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T is effective slice connective. Then the natural map
                                  MapSH(R) (S0,0,n , X) → Be(X)
        is an equivalence for any n ≤ 0.
    (2) In C2 -equivariant spectra, there is a canonical equivalence
                                    ΦC2 (koC2 ,2 ) ' ΦC2 (koC2 )2 .
Proof. Given X ∈ SH(R)Ai2T , it follows from Theorem 3.2 that Be(X) ' lim MapSH(R) (S0,0,n , X).
                                                                      −→
Part (1) therefore follows from Proposition 4.8.
  We now prove (2). By the cofiber sequence
                              (koC2 )hC2 → (koC2 )C2 → ΦC2 (koC2 )
and the fact that (−)C2 commutes with limits, it suffices to show that the canonical
map
                              (koC2 ,2 )hC2 → (koC2 )hC2 ,2
is an equivalence. This map is equivalent to
                                   ko2 ⊗ RP∞           ∞
                                           + → (ko ⊗ RP+ )2 ,

so this follows from connectivity of ko and the fact that RP∞
                                                            + is of finite type.                      
   The key input will be the following special case:
Proposition 8.5. The map
                               (kq ⊗ S2 )[1/2, 1/η] → kq2 [1/2, 1/η]
is an equivalence.
   This will make essential use of the following result of Bachmann.
Proposition 8.6. The assignment X 7→ X(R) induces an equivalence
                                         SH(R)[1/ρ] ' Sp .
Moreover, we have
                      SH(R)(2) [1/2, 1/η] = SH(R)(2) [1/2, 1/ρ] ' ModQ .
Proof. The first statement follows from [Bac18, Theorem 35 and Proposition 36]. The
second statement is a consequence of the first and [Bac18, Lemma 39].            
58               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


     Given Proposition 8.6, Proposition 8.5 is reduced to the following proposition:
Proposition 8.7. There are isomorphisms:
                             R
                           π∗,0,0 (kq(2) [1/2, 1/η]) ∼
                                                     = Q[β], |β| = 4
                           π R                    ∼
                                  (S2 [1/2, 1/η]) = Q2
                            ∗,0,0
                            R
                           π∗,0,0 (kq2 [1/2, 1/η]) ∼
                                                   = Q2 [β], |β| = 4.
Proof. Let W(R) denote the Witt group of the real numbers. There is an isomorphism
W(R) ∼= Z. It follows from [BH20a, Section 6.3.2] that
                           π R kq[1/η] ∼
                               ∗,0,0   = W(R)[β] ∼  = Z[β],
from which we deduce the first isomorphism.
   By Theorem 3.2, Betti realization induces an isomorphism
                             π R (S2 )[1/t] ∼
                                    ∗,∗,0   = π C2 (S2 ).   ∗+∗σ

As a consequence, we find
                             R
                            π∗,0,0 (S2 )[1/ρ] ∼  R
                                              = π∗,0,0 (S2 )[1/t, 1/a]
                                              ∼  C2
                                              = π (S2 )[1/aσ ]
                                                    ∗
                                               ∼
                                               = π∗ ΦC2 (S2 )
                                               ∼
                                               = π∗ S2 .
Inverting 2 and applying Proposition 8.6, we deduce the second isomorphism.
   For the third isomorphism, we make use of the sequence of equivalences
                   MapSH(R) (S0,0,n , kq2 ) ' lim MapSH(R) (S0,0,n , kq/2k )
                                              ←−
                                            ' lim Be(kq/2k )
                                              ←−
                                            ' Be(kq)2
                                               ' koC2 ,2 ,
where the second equivalence follows from Proposition 8.4(1) and the fourth equivalence
follows from [Kon20, Corollary 2.30].
   As a consequence, we find that
                          π R kq [1/ρ] ∼
                              ∗,0,0    2= π R kq [1/t, 1/a]
                                                    ∗,0,0     2
                                               ∼
                                               = π∗C2 koC2 ,2 [1/aσ ]
                                               ∼
                                               = π∗ ΦC2 (koC ,2 )  2

                                               ∼
                                               = π∗ ΦC2 (koC2 )2
                                               ∼
                                               = Z2 [β],
where the fourth isomorphism follows from Proposition 8.4(2) and the fifth isomorphism
follows from [GHIR20, Propositon 10.18]. Inverting 2 and applying Proposition 8.6, we
obtain the result.                                                                   
Proof of Theorem 8.1 for kq. We want to prove that
                                            kq ⊗ S2 → kq2
is an equivalence. It is clearly an equivalence after smashing with C(2), so it suffices to
show that it is an equivalence after inverting 2. Moreover, by the equivalence kq⊗C(η) '
kgl and the kgl case, it is also an equivalence after smashing with C(η). It therefore
suffices to show that
                            (kq ⊗ S2 )[1/2, 1/η] → kq2 [1/2, 1/η]
is an equivalence, which is Proposition 8.5.                                             
                GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                       59


8.2. Ta completion.
   At several points we have suggested that from a computational viewpoint the t-
Bockstein spectral sequence is probably the best way to gain access to various objects.
Here we show such computations often converge to the correct answer.
Proposition 8.8. The unit in SH(R)Ai2T is t-complete.
     Before proving this proposition we give a corollary of it.
Corollary 8.9. Every dualizable object of SH(R)Ai2T is t-complete.
     Now we turn to the proof of this proposition. We begin with the following lemma.
Lemma 8.10. MZ2 is t-complete.
Proof. Since the tri-graded spheres are a family of compact generators it will suffice to
show that                                                                 
                 lim · · · → πp,q,2
                              R
                                    (MZ2 ) → πp,q,1
                                              R
                                                    (MZ2 ) → πp,q,0
                                                              R
                                                                    (MZ2 )
                 ←−
is zero and there is no lim1 term. Both of these claims follow from the fact that
πp,q,w
  R
       (MZ2 ) = 0 for w ≥ 0.                                                           
Proof of Proposition 8.8. Since the MZ2 -Adams spectral sequence converges [HKO11a]
and limits of complete objects are complete we may use Lemma 8.10 to conclude.   
8.3. a-completion.
   Almost none of the objects we have encountered are a-complete. This stands in
contrast to C2 -equivariant homotopy theory, where the Segal conjecture implies that
the 2-completed unit is a-complete. To see explicit failures of completeness, note that
if an object X is a-complete then C t ⊗ X is also a-complete. On the other hand, the
homotopy groups of C t contain copies of the homotopy of Z2 , which is not a-complete.
Example 8.11. The elements aθn ⊗ 1 in the homotopy of C t give an explicit example
of non-a-completeness. If we consider the image of aθn under the connecting map δ :
Σ−1,0,1 C t → S we obtain an example of an infinitely a-divisible element in the sphere.
29


     On the other hand, it often happens that after inverting t objects becomes a-complete.
Lemma 8.12. On dualizable objects of SH(R)Ai2T the following functors are equivalent:
(−)[t−1 ], (−)∧
              a [t
                   −1
                      ] and (−)[t−1 ]∧
                                     a.

Proof. For any dualizable object X there is an n such that πp,q,w
                                                               R
                                                                    (C t ⊗X) = 0 for w ≤ n.
Using this we learn that on the level of trigraded homotopy groups the colimit inverting
t commutes with the inverse limit completing at a. Now, we only need to explain why
(−)[t−1 ] is already a-complete on dualizable inputs. If we invert t on a dualizable i2-
complete R-motivic spectrum we get a dualizable i2-complete C2 -spectrum. Thus, we’re
reduced to showing that dualizable i2-complete C2 -spectra are aσ -complete. Using the
fact that tensoring with a dualizable object commutes with limits it suffices to show this
is true for the unit. The 2-complete sphere in C2 -spectra is aσ -complete as a consequence
of Lin’s theorem [Lin80].                                                                
   The tension this introduces is heightened when one recalls Gregersen’s motivic analog
of Lin’s theorem, which is proved over any field of characteristic zero [Gre12]. However,
Gregersen’s result only asserts a π∗∗ -isomorphism, i.e. an equivalence after reflecting into
the Tate category. In fact, a careful examination of the formula for the homotopy groups
of C t reveals that the copies of the negative cone (from which the non-a-completeness
    29This image is non-trivial for n sufficiently large, though we don’t prove it. Of course if the image
is trivial for all n, then a lift of these classes to the sphere gives a different example of non-completeness.
60               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


originates) all lie below the plane of Tate spheres. Therefore, upon running the t-
Bockstein spectral sequence the tri-degrees (p, w, w) never receive contributions from
copies of the negative cone.

                                       9. Odd primes
   In this section we show that, when working at an odd prime p, the category SH(R)AipT
admits a simple description in terms of SH(C)AipT . The corresponding result for Tate
spectra is discussed in [BS20, p.23-24], following results of [Bac18].
Proposition 9.1. There is an equivalence of categories
                          SH(R)AipT ' Spip ×SH(C)AipT × SH(C)AipT .
  We begin with a well-known decomposition of SH(R)AipT into its + and − components.
Our treatment of this is heavily inspired by [BS20, pp.23-25]
Definition 9.2. Let SH(R)AipT,+ denote the category Mod(SH(R)AT ; Sp,η ).
Lemma 9.3. There is an equivalence of categories
                              SH(R)AipT ' SH(R)AipT,+ × Spip .
Proof. Let  = −ηρ − 1 ∈ π0,0,0
                          R
                                S, which is known to be equal to the swap map
                                                     ∼
                         = sS1,1,1 : S1,1,1 ⊗ S1,1,1 −
                                                      → S1,1,1 ⊗ S1,1,1 .
It is clear from this description that 2 = 1, so that after inverting 2 we have a decom-
position of the unit into ±1-eigenspaces
                                S[1/2] ' S[1/2]+ × S[1/2]− .
Now,  = +1 implies that ηρ = −2, so that η and ρ must be units in π∗,∗,∗R
                                                                               S[1/2]+ . On
the other hand, the fact that  = sS1,1,1 implies that the graded ring πa,a,a S[1/2]− must
                                                                        R

obey the Koszul sign rule, so that 2η 2 = 2ρ2 = 0.
   As a consequence, we find that S[1/2]+ ' S[1/2, 1/η] ' S[1/2, 1/ρ] and that S[1/2]− '
S[1/2]η ' S[1/2]ρ . To conclude, we base change from S[1/2] to Sp and use the equivalence
SH(R)[1/ρ] ' Sp of Bachmann [Bac18].                                                      
   Proposition 9.1 will now follow from showing that SH(R)AipT,+ splits as a product of
two copies of SH(C)AipT . This splitting will come from a decomposition of the category
into two blocks (in the sense of representation theory). We begin with the following pair
of lemmas.
Lemma 9.4. In SH(R)AipT,+ , there is a splitting Spec(C) ' S0,0,0  1,−1,0
                                                            p,η ⊕ Sp,η    .
                                     0,−1,0
Proof. It suffices to show that a : Sp,η    → Sp,η is zero. This follows from the facts that
cC/R is fully-faithful (see [HO18]) and that aσ = 0 in the C2 -equivariant category after
inverting 2 and η-completing (indeed, aσ η = 2).                                          
Lemma 9.5. The groups πs,q,w
                       R
                             Sp,η are zero for q odd.
     The proof of this lemma will take us farther afield, so we defer it for the moment.
Proof of Proposition 9.1. We need to show that
                            SH(R)AipT,+ ' SH(C)AipT × SH(C)AipT .
Let Aeven (resp. Aodd ) denote the stable full subcategory of SH(R)AipT,+ generated under
colimits by the objects Ss,q,w
                         p,η   for s, w ∈ Z and q even (resp. odd).
   We begin by showing that if A ∈ Aeven and B ∈ Aodd , then there are no nontrivial
maps between A and B. It suffices to show this for compact generators, where it follows
from Lemma 9.5. From this we may conclude that SH(R)AipT,+ ' Aeven × Aodd .
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                        61


  Since tensoring with S0,1,0 provides an equivalence between Aeven and Aodd it will
now suffice to show that the composite
                              Aeven → SH(R)AipT,+ → SH(C)AipT
is an equivalence. Since Ss,0,w is sent to Ss,w we know this map hits a family of compact
generators, so it will suffice to show that it is fully faithful. By the usual argument it
will suffice to have fully-faithfulness on compact generators. Thus, we are reduced to
showing that the map
                                   R
                                 πs,q,w Sp,η → πs+q,w
                                                 C
                                                       Sp,η .
is an isomorphism for q even. Using Lemma 9.4 this map factors as
                                                            ∼
                                                            =
                    R
                   πs,q,w          R
                          Sp,η ,→ πs,q,w (S0,0,0  1,−1,0
                                           p,η ⊕ Sp,η    )−
                                                          → πs+q,w
                                                             C
                                                                   Sp,η ,
where the first map is the inclusion of the left summand. We conclude by noting that
the relevant homotopy group of the right summand vanishes by Lemma 9.5.           
   We now return to proving Lemma 9.5. The proof will be via an Adams spectral
sequence argument, so we begin by computing the homology of a point. Note that MFp
is η-complete, and so inside of SH(R)AipT,+ .
Lemma 9.6. The tri-graded homotopy of MFp is given by
                                    R
                                   πs,q,w MFp ∼
                                              = Fp [u±
                                                     2σ , t],

where |u2σ | = (2, −2, 0).
Proof. From the computation of the homology of a point over C in [Voe03b] we may
conclude that πs,q,w
                 R
                     (Spec(C)⊗MFp ) ∼        σ , t]. Using the splitting of Spec(C) we may
                                      = Fp [u±
conclude that the homology of a point over R is an index 2 subalgebra which contains
t (since t is defined in the sphere). There is a unique such subalgebra.                
Lemma 9.7. The tensor product MFp ⊗ MFp splits as a sum of tri-graded suspensions
of copies of MFp whose q-components are even.
Proof. From [HKØ17, Theorem 1.1 (3)] (which follows from work of Voevodsky [Voe03b,
Voe10] in case of R where we work) we know that MFp ⊗ MFp decomposes as a sum of
copies of Σa,b,b MFp . More specifically, the copies of MFp are indexed by monomials in
the ξi and τi which live in degrees,
           |ξi | = (pi − 1, pi − 1, pi − 1)    and       |τi | = (pi , pi − 1, pi − 1).
Since p is odd the q-component of every such monomial is even.                            
Proof of Lemma 9.5. Since the motivic Adams spectral sequence for the sphere con-
verges strongly to Sp,η by [HKO11a], it will suffice to show the desired vanishing result
on the E1 -page. This spectral sequence takes the form,
                          E1s,t = πt,q,w (MF⊗s+1
                                            2    )=⇒πt−s,q,w Sp,η .
Using Lemma 9.6 and Lemma 9.7 we may conclude that the spectral sequence is zero
at the E1 page for q odd.                                                     

                             10. Examples and computations
   In this section we employ technology from the rest of the paper to give example,
concrete computations of trigraded homotopy groups. First, we discuss vanishing regions
in the homotopy groups of objects obtained from the sphere by either killing or inverting
a and t. Then we give a detailed discussion of kq2 , which we hope will be a useful guide
to computationally minded stable homotopy theorists.
62                   ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


10.1. Vanishing regions for trigraded homotopy.
   The coarsest information about the trigraded homotopy groups of Artin–Tate R-
motivic spectra comes from understanding which regions contain only zero groups. We
summarize what we know in the following omnibus theorem.
Theorem 10.1. By either coning or inverting a ∈ π0,−1,0
                                                    R
                                                           S and t ∈ π0,0,−1
                                                                       R
                                                                             S2 , we may
build 9 natural objects. The trigraded homotopy groups of these objects are concentrated
in the following regions.
    (1) πp,q,w
          R
               (S2 ) is concentrated in the region,
                        {p + q ≥ w ≥ 0} ∪ {p + q ≥ 0, w ≤ 0} ∪ {p ≥ 0}.
     (2)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (C t) is concentrated in the region,
                     {0 ≤ p ≤ 2w − q, w ≥ 0} ∪ {w − q ≤ p ≤ w − 2, w ≥ 0}.
     (3)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (S2 [t−1 ]) is periodic in the w-degree and concentrated in the region,
                                      {p ≥ 0} ∪ {p + q ≥ 0}.
     (4)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (Ca) is periodic along lines of the form (1, −1, 0) and concentrated in the
           region,
                             {0 ≤ w ≤ p + q} ∪ {0 ≤ p + q, w ≤ 0}.
     (5)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (Ca ⊗ C t) is periodic along lines of the form (1, −1, 0) and concentrated
           in the region,
                                       {w ≤ p + q ≤ 2w}.
     (6) πp,q,w
          R
                (Ca ⊗ S2 [t−1 ]) is periodic in the w-degree, periodic along lines of the form
         (1, −1, 0) and concentrated in the region,
                                           {p + q ≥ 0}.
     (7)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (S2 [a−1 ]) is periodic in the q-degree and concentrated in the region,
                                             {p ≥ 0}.
     (8) πp,q,w
          R
                (S2 [a−1 ] ⊗ C t) is periodic in the q-degree and concentrated in the region,
                                         {p ≥ 0, w ≥ 0}.
     (9)   πp,q,w
            R
                  (S2 [a−1 , t−1 ]) is periodic in the q-degree, periodic in the w-degree and con-
           centrated in the region,
                                             {p ≥ 0}.
Proof. We begin with (4), (5) and (6), where we have killed a. In the identification
of Ca-modules with the C-motivic category, the trigraded homotopy group πp,q,w Ca
is identified with the bigraded stem πp+q,w SC                        ∼
                                                2 . Hence, πp,q,w Ca = πp+m,q−m,w Ca for
any integer m. That πp,q,w Ca vanishes outside the indicated regions then reduces to
well-known vanishing statements for the C-motivic stable stems, as displayed on [GI17,
p.2]. Similarly, again as indicated on [GI17, p.2], (5) and (6) are consequences of [Lev14,
Theorem 6.7]. Analogously, statements (3) and (9) follow from combining Theorem 3.2
with the known vanishing regions in C2 -equivariant stable stems (for such vanishing
regions, see e.g. [BGI20, Figure 5]).
   Upon inverting a in (1) and (2) we recover (7) and (8), respectively, so it remains
only to prove (1) and (2). In fact, since Proposition 8.8 proves that S2 is t-complete, we
may obtain (1) from (2) by examining the E1 -page of the t-Bockstein spectral sequence.
Finally, in order to prove (2) we directly examine the homotopy of C t. In Theorem 5.1
we computed that
        π R (C t) ∼             Exts,2w
                         M
           p,q,w    =                         ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ ⊗Z π C2
                                      (MU2 )∗ MU2                       2
                                                                                Z ).
                                                                            a+(q−w)σ   2
                         w+a−s=p

The result then follows by combining the following vanishing results:
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                  63


      • Exts,2w                                     s,2w
            (MU2 )∗ MU2 ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ ) and Ext(MU2 )∗ MU2 ((MU2 )∗ , (MU2 )∗ /2) are con-
        centrated in the region {0 ≤ s ≤ 2w}.
         C2
      • πp+qσ Z2 is concentrated in the region {p ≥ 0, p + q ≤ 0} ∪ {p ≤ −2, p + q ≥ 0}.
                                                                                            
Remark 10.2. As a corollary of the vanishing region for C t and the t-completeness
of the unit, we recover [BGI20, Theorem 1.1], which describes the region in which
                  C2
Be : πp,w,w
      R
            S2 → πp+wσ S2 is an isomorphism.
10.2. The homotopy of kq2 . To aid the computationally minded reader, we give
below some charts of the trigraded homotopy groups of kq2 . These charts are meant to
be read in concert with those of [Kon20, §6.5], and the notation here matches that in
Kong’s work. Indeed, all of the information within these charts is easily accessed within
Kong’s work, and we merely repackage it here.
   We focus on the homotopy groups πp,q,w (kq2 ⊗ C t) and πp,q,w (kq2 ) for p = 0 and
p = −1. In the language of [Kon20], this corresponds to a focus on coweights 0 and −1.


                                                 π0,q,w (C t ⊗ kq2 )


        8
        7
        6
                                                                                            γ 6
        5                                                                                   u5 v1


        4
  w




                                                                             γ 4
                                                                             u3 v1
        3
        2                                             γ 2
                                                      u v1
        1
                                    h1
        0
                            1

              −2 −1     0       1        2   3    4      5       6   7   8      9    10 11 12 13
                                                             q



   Red lines denote multiplication by a ∈ π0,−1,0 S. Black lines denote multiplication by
the motivic η : Gm → S, which in our grading convention lives in π0,1,1 S.
64                 ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


                                                          π−1,q,w (C t ⊗ kq2 )


         8
         7
         6
                                                                                                                    γ 6
         5                                                                                                          u6 v1


         4
 w




                                                                                                      γ 4
                                                                                                      u4 v1
         3
         2                                                            γ 2
                                                                      u2 v1
         1
         0

                 −2 −1    0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10 11 12 13 14
                                                                          q

   Below, we depict some of the E∞ -page of the t-Bockstein spectral sequence for
π∗,∗,∗ kq2 . We follow the convention introduced in [BHS19, §A.2] and [Bur20] of us-
ing blue symbols to denote t-torsion classes, while black symbols denote t-torsion free
classes. In particular, black symbols contribute not only to the homotopy group cor-
responding to the box in which they appear, but also to the groups corresponding to
boxes directly below where they appear. In the language of [Kon20], the blue dots in our
charts contain information about which dots on the E1 -page of the C2 -effective spectral
sequence are targets of differentials, as opposed to sources of differentials.

                   The E∞ -page of the t-Bockstein spectral sequence for π0,q,w (kq2 )


             8
             7
             6
             5
             4
     w




             3
             2
             1                            h1

             0                    1

                  −2 −1       0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9    10 11 12 13
                                                                  1       q
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                65




                  The E∞ -page of the t-Bockstein spectral sequence for π−1,q,w (kq2 )


       8
       7
       6
       5
       4
 w




                                                                               γ    2 2    γ 4
                                                                             a2 u2 v1 h1 + u4 v1
       3
       2
       1
       0

             −2 −1      0    1     2     3      4   5   6    7     8     9     10 11 12 13 14
                                                        q


Remark 10.3. The groups π−1,∗,∗ kq2 and π0,∗,∗ kq2 assemble, via the multiplication
by a long exact sequence, into the homotopy groups π0,∗,∗ (Ca ⊗ kq2 ). These groups
in turn record the bigraded homotopy of the C-motivic kq2 . The reader may note an
interesting extension, of the form
                                 2Z2 [τ ] ⊕ τ Z2 [τ ] → Z2 [τ ] → F2 ,
which appears when computing π0,8,∗ (kq∧  2 ⊗Ca). This extension is related to the orange
dashed line in the final chart of [Kon20].

           Appendix A. Recollections on compact rigid generation
   In this appendix we recall some useful material on compact rigid generation. Most
of this material has appeared elsewhere and all of it is certainly known to experts. This
appendix was mostly included for the convenience of the authors, though we do hope
the reader finds it to be a concise summary of a basic technique in higher algebra.
Definition A.1. A stable, presentably monoidal category C is rigidly generated if it
has a family of compact dualizable generators. 30
  Our goal will be to study some properties of monoidal left adjoints out of a rigidly
generated category. This begins with the following construction.
Construction A.2. Given an En -monoidal left adjoint f ∗ : C → D, its right adjoint f∗
is lax En -monoidal. In particular, f∗ (1) is an En -ring, so we obtain a factorization of
f ∗ as an En−1 -monoidal left adjoint into
                                       −⊗f∗ 1                 g∗
                                 C −−−−→ Mod(C; f∗ 1) −→ D.
We will say that the adjunction f is 0-affine if g is an adjoint equivalence. Note that
being 0-affine is a property of the underlying monoidal functor.
   30Here and throughout this appendix we only require that an object has a one-sided dual. The side
                                                 1
on which an object has a dual will not be important.
66              ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


  The main result of this appendix is a convenient criterion for f to be 0-affine. Before
we can state that result we make a preparatory definition.
Definition A.3. Given a monoidal left adjoint f ∗ : C → D, we may consider the
projection map,
                     ηf                                           f
          X ⊗ f∗ Y −→ f∗ f ∗ (X ⊗ f∗ Y ) ' f∗ (f ∗ X ⊗ f ∗ f∗ Y ) −→ f∗ (f ∗ X ⊗ Y ).
We will say that f satisfies the projection formula at X, if for all Y the projection map
is an equivalence. If f satisfies the projection formula at X for all X, then we say that
f satisfies the projection formula.
Proposition A.4. Given a monoidal left adjoint f ∗ : C → D between presentable
categories, the following statements are true:
    (1) f satisfies the projection formula for dualizable objects in C.
    (2) If C is rigidly generated and D has compact unit, then f∗ preserves colimits.
    (3) If C is rigidly generated and f∗ preserves colimits, then f satisfies the projection
        formula.
    (4) f∗ is conservative if and only if the essential image of f ∗ contains a family of
        generators.
    (5) If f satisfies the projection formula, f∗ preserves colimits and f∗ is conservative,
        then f is 0-affine.
  Our arguments follow those from [MNN17] fairly closely, though the hypotheses are
somewhat different. Before proceeding to the proof of this proposition we give some
examples to demonstrate its effectiveness.
Example A.5. In appendix Appendix B we study the category SpFil of filtered spectra,
where we denote the shift map 1(−1) → 1 by τ . The associated graded functor Gr :
SpFil → SpGr satisfies the conditions of Proposition A.4, so we obtain an equivalence of
presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                                   SpGr ∼
                                        = Mod(SpFil ; Cτ ).
Here Cτ acquires a commutative algebra structure from the fact that it equivalent to
the image of the unit under the right adjoint of Gr.
Example A.6. Again working with SpFil , the realization functor Re : SpFil → Sp
satisfies the conditions of Proposition A.4, so we obtain an equivalence of presentably
symmetric monoidal categories
                                     = Mod(SpFil ; 1[τ −1 ]).
                                  Sp ∼
Here 1[τ −1 ] acquires a commutative algebra structure from the fact that it is equivalent
to the image of the unit under Y (the right adjoint of Re).
Example A.7. Given a finite extension of characteristic zero fields `/k we have a
symmetric monoidal left adjoint i∗ : SH(k) → SH(`). Using resolution of singularities,
Nagata compactification and purity we know that both of these categories are generated
by the motives of smooth projective schemes, each of which is dualizable [ROsr08].
In short, both the source and target categories are rigidly generated, with families of
compact dualizable generators given by Sm ⊗(P1 )⊗n ⊗X where X is a smooth projective
scheme over the base.
   In order to show that i is 0-affine we only need to show that the image of i∗ contains
a family of generators. Given a smooth projective `-scheme X the projection formula
Proposition A.4(1) gives us an equivalence
                          i∗ (Sm ⊗(P1 )⊗n ⊗ X) ' Sm ⊗(P1 )⊗n ⊗ i∗ X.
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                                     67


Since for field extensions i] = i∗ , we learn that i∗ X = X where the second copy of X is
considered as a k-scheme. It will now suffice to show that X is a retract of i∗ i∗ X. At
the level of schemes this means looking at X ×Spec(`) Spec(`) ×Spec(k) Spec(`). Using the
maps ` → ` ⊗k ` → ` we may conclude.
   Stated more explicitly, we have an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal
categories
                              SH(`) ∼ = Mod(SH(k); Spec(`)).
Using the fact that i restricts to the subcategories of Artin–Tate objects the same
argument provides an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                                       SH(`)AT ∼
                                               = Mod(SH(k)AT ; Spec(`)).
Example A.8. The category of C2 -spectra is rigidly generated and the underlying
spectrum functor, Φe , is essentially surjective. We may thus apply Proposition A.4 to
obtain a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                                              Mod(SpC2 ; R1 ) ' Sp,
where R1 is the image of S under the right adjoint to Φe . Since Φe can be described as
homotopy fixed points (or homotopy orbits) composed with (C2 )+ ⊗ −, we find that its
right adjoint is given by tensoring with (C2 )+ ' Caσ . Therefore, R1 ' Caσ .
   Similarly, with Φe replaced by ΦC2 we obtain a symmetric monoidal equivalence
                                              Mod(SpC2 ; R2 ) ' Sp,
where R2 is the image of S under the right adjoint to geometric fixed points. We
can compute that R2 ' S[a−1
                          σ ] using the presentation of C2 -spectra via an isotropy
separation square.
Example A.9. Taking loops on the map i : S 1 → B Pic(SpC2 ) which sends a generator
to Sσ we get a monoidal functor i : Z → Pic(SpC2 ). Embedding the target into SpC2
and tensoring up to spectra we obtain a monoidal left adjoint,
                                                 i∗ : SpGr → SpC2

which sends S(1) to Sσ . Since SpGr is rigidly generated, the unit in SpC2 is compact and
the representation spheres generate SpC2 we may apply Proposition A.4 to conclude that
i is 0-affine. Stated more explicitly, we have an equivalence of presentable categories,
                                            SpC2 ∼
                                                 = Mod(SpGr ; i∗ S).
The graded ring i∗ S has nth term given by MapSp (Snσ , S). Expressed in terms of stunted
                                         −n−1
projective spaces we have (i∗ S)n ' ΣRP−∞     .
Proof (of Proposition A.4(1)). Consider the following commutative diagram, which is
natural in X ∈ C dbl , Y ∈ D and Z ∈ C.
                                                             '


    MapC (X ∨ ⊗ Z, f∗ Y )                    MapD (f ∗ (X ∨ ⊗ Z), f ∗ f∗ Y )            MapD (f ∗ (X ∨ ⊗ Z), Y )
                                                               '                                      '

              '                             MapD   (f ∗ (X ∨ ) ⊗ f ∗ Z, f ∗ f   ∗Y )   MapD   (f ∗ (X ∨ ) ⊗ f ∗ Z, Y )
                                                               '                                      '

     MapC (Z, X ⊗ f∗ Y )                    MapD ((f ∗ X)∨ ⊗ f ∗ Z, f ∗ f∗ Y )         MapD ((f ∗ X)∨ ⊗ f ∗ Z, Y )
                                                               '                                      '
                                        '
  MapD   (f ∗ Z, f ∗ (X ⊗ f   ∗ Y ))         MapD    (f ∗ Z, f ∗ X ⊗ f ∗ f   ∗Y )       MapD    (f ∗ Z, f ∗ X ⊗ Y )
68               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


   The rectangle on the left commutes due to the compatibility of dualization with the
monoidal structure on f ∗ . The remaining squares commute for easier reasons. Now
observe that starting in the middle of the left side and proceeding counter-clockwise
gives the projection map, while proceeding clockwise given an equivalence.          

Proof (of Proposition A.4(2)). Since C is rigidly generated it has a family of compact
dualizable generators. Monoidal functors send dualizable objects to dualizable objects.
Since the unit of D is compact we learn that f ∗ sends dualizable objects to compact
objects. Thus, since f ∗ sends a family of compact generators to compact objects its
right adjoint f∗ preserves colimits.                                                 

Proof (of Proposition A.4(3)). The projection formula asks that the natural projection
map
                               X ⊗ f∗ Y → f∗ (f ∗ X ⊗ Y )
be an equivalence. Using the hypotheses that f∗ preserves colimits and C is rigidly
generated we can reduce to the case where X is a compact dualizable generator. We
may now use Proposition A.4(1) to conclude.                                      

Proof (of Proposition A.4(4)). Clear.                                                  

Proof (of Proposition A.4(5)). We begin by showing that g ∗ is fully faithful. This is
equivalent to showing that the unit map X → g∗ g ∗ X is an equivalence. Applying
the projection formula with Y = 1, we can conclude that this is true for induced
f∗ 1-modules. Since f∗ preserves colimits and Mod(C; f∗ 1) is generated by induced f∗ 1-
modules this is sufficient to conclude.
   Now, we show that g ∗ is essentially surjective. By Proposition A.4(4) we know the
essential image of f ∗ contains a family of generators (and g ∗ has the same property).
Using fully-faithfulness we can now conclude that g ∗ is essentially surjective.      

     We close the appendix with another useful lemma.
Lemma A.10. Suppose that C and D are stable presentably symmetric monoidal cate-
gories, and let R be a commutative algebra in C. Given a symmetric monoidal left adjoint
f ∗ : C → D, there is an equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                            Mod(D; f ∗ R) ' Mod(C; R) ⊗C D .
Proof. This follows from [Lur17, Theorem 4.8.5.16] after unraveling the definitions. 

Example A.11. Given a stable presentably symmetric monoidal category C and a
commutative algebra R ∈ C Fil , this lemma provides an equivalence
         SpGr ⊗SpFil Mod(C Fil ; R) ' C Gr ⊗C Fil Mod(C Fil ; R) ' Mod(C Gr ; Gr(R))

                 Appendix B. Recollections on filtered objects
   In this appendix we give a more detailed introduction to filtered objects. The results
here are well-known (cf. [Lur15]), and we aim mainly to fix notation.
Convention B.1. In this appendix, C will denote a stable, presentable category. We
will use 1 to denote the unit of C when it is monoidal.
Definition B.2. We let Z denote the symmetric monoidal category with underlying
category given by the discrete set Z and symmetric monoidal structure given by addition.
   Similarly, we let ZFil denote the symmetric monoidal category with underlying cat-
egory given by the poset Z with its order ≤, so that there is a unique map n → m
whenever n ≤ m, and symmetric monoidal structure given by addition.
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                        69


Definition B.3. Given a category C, we let C Fil := Fun(ZFil,op , C) denote the category
of filtered objects in C. Objects of C Fil are diagrams
                         · · · → C2 → C1 → C0 → C−1 → C−2 → . . .
in the category C. We will sometimes use the notation C• for an object of C Fil .
      • There is a natural left adjoint c : C → C Fil , which sends C to the constant object
                                              id       id   id
                           · · · → 0 → 0 → C −→ C −→ C −→ . . .
       that is equal to C in nonpositive degrees and 0 in positive degrees.
     • There is a natural left adjoint Y : C → C Fil , which sends C to the constant
       object
                               id   id   id   id    id    id
                        . . . −→ C −→ C −→ C −→ C −→ C −→ . . .
       that is equal to C in each degree.
     • The functor Y admits a left adjoint Re : C Fil → C, which sends C• to limn C−n .
                                                                              −→
     • The category C Fil admits natural automorphisms (k) : C Fil → C Fil that send C•
       to C•−k .
     • There is a natural transformation τ : (−1) → Id, which captures the shift map
       in the filtration. We depict τ on cX below,
                   ...        0        0           0        X       X         ...


                    ...      0        0         X         X         X         ...
        If C is monoidal, then we will refer to the cofiber of τ : 1(−1) → 1 as Cτ .
   We let C Gr := Fun(Zop , C) denote the category of graded objects in C. Objects of
C Gr
     are collections {Cn }n of objects of C. We will sometimes use the notation C∗ for
an object of C Gr .
      • There is a natural fully-faithful left adjoint c : C → C Gr , which sends C to C∗
        with C0 = C and Ck = 0 for k 6= 0.
      • There is a natural left adjoint Gr : C Fil → C Gr , which sends
                         · · · → C2 → C1 → C0 → C−1 → C−2 → . . .
         to {Cn /Cn+1 }n .
   If C is a presentably En -monoidal category, then C Fil and C Gr inherit the structure
of En -monoidal categories under Day convolution, and the functors c, Y , Re, c and Gr
are all En -monoidal.
Remark B.4. Using the assumption that C is stable and presentable we can offer
another description of the categories of filtered and graded objects, which is often useful
in proofs.
                       C Fil ' SpFil ⊗ C and C Gr ' SpGr ⊗ C.
Since it is well-known that the analogs of c, Y , Re, c and Gr are symmetric monoidal
in the case of spectra, the claims about En monoidality made above follow by tensoring
up.
   Using the fact that 1(1) ⊗ 1(−1) ' 1, we learn that if X is a dualizable object of C,
then c(X)(n) is a dualizable object of C Fil . Similarly, we have that if {Xα } is a set of
compact (dualizable) generators of C, then {c(Xα )(k)} is a set of compact (dualizable)
generators of C Fil .
Lemma B.5. Given an En -monoidal category C, the image of 1 under the right adjoint
of Re is 1[τ −1 ]; therefore this object is an En -algebra and there is an equivalence of
En−1 -monoidal categories Mod(C Fil ; 1[τ −1 ]) ' C. Similarly, the image of 1 ∈ C Gr
under the right adjoint of Gr is Cτ ; therefore this object is an En -algebra and there
70                ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


is an equivalence of En−1 -monoidal categories Mod(C Fil ; Cτ ) ' C Gr . Moreover, the
functors − ⊗ 1[τ −1 ] and − ⊗ Cτ are identified under these equivalences with Re and Gr,
respectively.
Proof. The case of spectra was handled in Examples A.5 and A.6. For a general C we
just tensor the case of spectra with C.                                          

           Appendix C. A machine for deforming homotopy theories
   In this appendix, we have two goals. The first is to identify a technique which
produces 1-parameter deformations in homotopy theory. This technique is essentially
an elaboration of [GIKR18, Definition 3.2]. The second goal is to provide a recognition
criterion for 1-parameter deformations. This criterion will be applied in Section 4 of
the main paper to identify SH(R)Ai2T with the category of modules over a commutative
algebra in i2-complete filtered C2 -spectra.
   The approach to deforming categories taken here is different than the approach taken
in Pstrągowski’s theory of synthetic spectra [Pst18], which is a theory specifically about
deformations of Sp. When our construction here and Pstrągowki’s construction are both
defined, we will show that they are equivalent up to a minor completion issue. This in
turn suggests that a more general version of Pstrągowski’s approach is possible, where
an arbitrary (symmetric monoidal) presentable category is deformed.
   This appendix is not intended to be a definitive treatment of deformations. Instead,
we view at as an illustration of a variety of elementary techniques, which in combination
produce a large collection of interesting examples.

C.1. Constructing deformations.
  In this section we will give techniques for producing 1-parameter deformations.
Convention C.1. In this section, C will denote a stable presentably symmetric monoidal
category. We will use 1 to denote the unit of C, and assume the notation of Appendix B
     The deformations we produce will all be of the form
                                           Mod(C Fil ; R)
for some kind of algebra R.31 Therefore, what we really do is give methods for con-
structing algebras in filtered objects.
   We will produce commutative algebras in C Fil through the following method. Given
a lax symmetric monoidal functor F : C → C Fil , the image of the unit F (1) is a
commutative algebra in C Fil . If we let L denote the composite Re ◦ F , then we have the
following proposition.
Proposition C.2. The presentably symmetric monoidal category Mod(C Fil ; F (1)) is a
1-parameter deformation in the sense that,
    (1) There is a colimit-preserving symmetric monoidal functor out of C Fil with target
        Mod(C Fil ; F (1)).
    (2) The generic fiber is given by Mod(C; L(1)), in the sense that there is an equiv-
        alences of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                            Mod(C Fil ; F (1)[τ −1 ]) ' Mod(C; L(1)).
      (3) The special fiber is given by Mod(C Gr ; Gr F (1)), in the sense that there is an
          equivalences of presentably symmetric monoidal categories
                       Mod(C Fil ; F (1) ⊗ Cτ ) ' Mod(C Gr ; Gr(F (1))).
   31Although much of the material in this appendix applies for E -algebras in E -monoidal categories,
                                                                 n              n
the extra generality was not necessary for this work.
               GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                71


Moreover, when viewed as a lax symmetric monoidal functor, F factors as
                                  → Mod(C Fil ; F (1)) → C Fil .
                                    G
                                 C−
Proof. This follows immediately from Lemma B.5 and Lemma A.10.                                      
   We will refer to lax symmetric monoidal functors T : C → C Fil as tower functors and
give several examples.
Example C.3. The functors c and Y are tower functors.
Example C.4. The functor τ≥• : Sp → SpFil is a tower functor.
Example C.5. If C has a t-structure which is compatible with the tensor product in
the sense that the unit is connective and the tensor product of two connective objects
is connective, then
                                     τ≥• : C → C Fil
is a tower functor. More generally we have a tower functor τ≥m• : C → C Fil for natural
numbers m.
Construction C.6. Suppose we are given a collection A of coreflective subcategories
 A
C≥k ⊂ C, such that
      • if X ∈ C≥k
                A
                   and Y ∈ C≥`
                            A
                               , then X ⊗ Y ∈ C≥k+`
                                               A
                                                    .
      • C≥k+1 ⊂ C≥k and 1 ∈ C≥0 .
          A       A           A

   Let τ≥k : C → C≥kA
                       denote the right adjoints of the inclusions. Then, we can assemble
                                                         Fil,A
these categories into a single coreflective subcategory C≥0    consisting of filtered objects
                         · · · → X2 → X1 → X0 → X−1 → X−2 → . . .
                                                         Fil,A
for which Xi ∈ C≥i A
                     . The right adjoint τ≥0
                                           A
                                              : C Fil → C≥0    to the inclusion is given by
applying τ≥i in position i.
                                        Fil,A
   Our assumptions guarantee that C≥0         is closed under the tensor product and so
admits a natural presentably symmetric monoidal structure, for which the inclusion
  Fil,A
C≥0     ⊂ C Fil is a symmetric monoidal functor. As a consequence, we obtain a lax
symmetric monoidal endofunctor
                                          A
                                         τ≥0 : C Fil → C Fil .
Example C.7. If C is the category of G-equivariant spectra for some finite group G,
then we can let C≥k
                  slice
                        be the regular slice k-connective G-spectra.32 As a variant we
could also take the regular slice mk-connective subcategories for some positive integer
m.
   Each of the above examples of tower functors can be described as a composite of Y
with an appropriately chosen τ≥0 . This construction can be considered a generalization
of the twisted t-structures on filtered objects considered in Section 5.2. Thus, so far
we have only produced “truncation type towers.” We now give a construction which
takes in a tower functor T and a commutative algebra in C and produces a new tower
functor. This construction will have the effect of shearing the Adams spectral sequence
based on E along the tower T . To begin, we review the monoidal properties of the cobar
construction.
Construction C.8. Since the coproduct of commutative algebras in C is given by the
tensor product, the cobar construction can be upgraded into a functor
                                   cb : CAlg(C) → CAlg(C ∆ ).
   32Note that we cannot use the classical slice filtration here, unless m is divisible by |G| in which
case it agrees with the regular one, since it is not compatible with the tensor product.
72               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


Construction C.9. Given a tower functor T and a commutative algebra E in C, we
define a new tower functor Sh(T ; E) which is the composite,
                               −⊗cb(E)           T          Tot
                            C −−−−−−→ C ∆ −
                                          → C Fil,∆ −−→ C Fil .
  On spectra, the tower functor Sh(τ≥• ; Fp ) produces the décalage of the Fp -Adams
tower on the input. More generally, given a t-structure t that is compatible with the
monoidal structure, we can let C≥n
                                t
                                   be the n-connective objects. Then Sh(τ≥0 t
                                                                              ; E)(X)
captures the E-based Adams spectral sequence for the t-structure homotopy groups of
X. As an analog of the fact that the E-Adams spectral sequence for E collapses, we
have the following:
Example C.10. The cosimplicial diagram E ⊗ cb(E) admits a contracting homotopy,
and therefore the totalization commutes with any functor. In particular, we obtain an
equivalence of commutative algebras, Sh(T ; E)(E) ' T (E).
     We close with a simple lemma that lets us identify the generic fiber in certain cases.
Lemma C.11. Suppose we are given a collection of coreflective subcategories A that
                                                                                     A
satisfy the conditions of Construction C.6, together with a commutative algebra E ∈ C≥0 .
                      A                                   A         ∧
Then for any X ∈ C≥k there is an equivalence Re(Sh(τ≥0 ; E)) ' XE , where the second
object is the E-nilpotent completion of X.
Proof. By construction τ≥0A
                             comes equipped with a natural transformation τ≥0
                                                                           A
                                                                              → Y.
Since Sh(Y ; E) ' Y (−)E , we have a natural transformation
                       ∧

                                       A
                                   Sh(τ≥0 ; E) → Y (X)∧
                                                      E.

In sufficiently negative degrees the τ≥i ’s have no effect by hypothesis, so the totalizations
are levelwise equivalences. There is thus an equivalence
                                  A
                           Re(Sh(τ≥0 ; E)) ' ReY (X)∧      ∧
                                                    E ' (X)E .                              

Remark C.12. Under the assumptions of Lemma C.11, we have an equivalence
                                       A
                       Mod(C Fil ; Sh(τ≥0 ; E)(1)[τ −1 ]) ' Mod(C; 1∧
                                                                    E ).

C.2. Recognizing Deformations.
  In this section, we give one answer to the following open-ended question:
Question C.13. Given a pair of presentably symmetric monoidal categories Cdef and
C, when can we identify Cdef with Mod(C Fil ; R) for some commutative algebra R ∈ C Fil ?
   This section grew out of a recognition that our original arguments in Section 4, which
related SH(R)Ai2T and SpC2 ,i2 , used only very general information.
Definition C.14. A deformation pair consists of the following data:
       • A diagram of symmetric monoidal left adjoints
                                                     Cdef
                                             c               Re

                                                      Id
                                         C                        C.
       • A map of abelian groups
                          i0 : Z → ker (π0 Pic(Cdef ) → π0 Pic(C)) .
          We denote the invertible object corresponding to i0 (n) by 1(n).
These data are subject to the following conditions:
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                          73


      • For a ≤ b, the map on mapping spaces
                               HomCdef (1(a), 1(b)) → HomC (1, 1)
        induced by Re is an equivalence.
      • The category C is rigidly generated, and there is a set {Cα } of compact dualizable
        objects in C with the property that {c(Cα )⊗ 1(n)} is a set of compact dualizable
        generators for Cdef .
Example C.15. Suppose that C is a rigidly generated, stable, presentably symmetric
monoidal category. Then it is easy to verify that (C Fil , C) is a deformation pair where
i0 : Z → Pic(C Fil ) sends n to 1(n).
Example C.16. Let E denote an Adams type homology theory, and let SynE denote
Pstrągowski’s category of E-synthetic spectra [Pst18]. This category is equipped with
a natural notion of bigraded sphere, and we let Syncell    E   ⊂ SynE denote the cellular
subcategory generated under colimits by Sp,q .33 There is a natural realization functor
SynE → Sp, as well as a symmetric monoidal left adjoint Sp → SynE provided by
[Lur17, Corollary 4.8.2.19].
                                                                                           0,n
   Then (Syncell
              E , Sp) is a deformation pair, where the map i0 picks out the spheres S          .
The first condition is satisfied by [Pst18, Corollary 4.12], and the second is satisfied since
we restricted to the full subcategory generated by the bi-graded spheres.
Example C.17. Another example is given by (SH(C)cell    ip , Spip ) where the map i0 picks
out the Tate twists. The realization functor here is Betti realization, and we set c to
be the unital, colimit-preserving map in from Spip as in Example 1.6. By restricting
to cellular objects the second condition is automatically satisfied. The first condition is
ultimately a corollary of the vanishing of the homotopy of Cτ in positive Chow degrees.
This example is discussed at length in [GIKR18].
   Given a deformation pair (Cdef , C), we would like to construct a symmetric monoidal
left adjoint C Fil → Cdef to which we may apply Proposition A.4. We will do this in two
steps:
     (1) We construct a symmetric monoidal functor i : ZFil → Cdef , which sends n to
         1(n).
     (2) We tensor iFil up to C using c.
Construction C.18. Given a deformation pair (Cdef , C), we construct a square of sym-
metric monoidal functors,
                                                 i
                                        ZFil            Cdef
                                                             Re

                                            ∗            C
such that i(n) = 1(n).
Details. Let D denote the full subcategory of C on the unit. Let Ddef denote the full
subcategory of Cdef on the objects 1(n) in the image of i0 . Since Ddef and D are closed
under the tensor product they are each symmetric monoidal categories.
  We now form the following diagram of symmetric monoidal categories
                           f                    Re×Id                  π2
                     D0          Ddef × ZFil            D × ZFil            ZFil
                                       π1                         π1
                                                 Re
                                     Ddef                      D             ∗,

   33When E is F                  cell
                 p or MU, then SynE = SynE .
74             ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


where D0 is the full subcategory of Ddef × ZFil spanned by the objects (1(n), n). Since
D0 is closed under the monoidal structure, it canonically inherits a symmetric monoidal
structure from Ddef × ZFil .
   We claim that the composite D0 → D × ZFil is an equivalence. The objects of D0
may be identified with pairs (1(n), n) and the objects of D × ZFil may be identified with
pairs (1, n). The mapping spaces are given by:
                                              HomDdef (1(n), 1(m)) n ≤ m
                                            (
             HomD0 ((1(n), n), (1(m), m)) =
                                              ∅                        n>m

                                                 HomD (1, 1) n ≤ m
                                               (
                  HomD×ZFil ((1, n), (1, m)) =
                                                 ∅              n > m,
with Re giving the maps between these mapping spaces. Each of these maps of mapping
spaces is an equivalence, by hypothesis.
   The composition of symmetric monoidal functors
                         ι                    '
                 ZFil →          − D0 → Ddef × ZFil → Ddef ⊂ Cdef
                      − D × ZFil ←
is the desired symmetric monoidal functor ZFil → Cdef , and indeed sends n to 1(n).
The square of Construction C.18 commutes, because
 Re ◦ π1 ◦ f ◦ (Re × Id)−1 ◦ ι = π1 ◦ (Re × Id) ◦ f ◦ ((Re × Id) ◦ f )−1 ◦ ι = π1 ◦ ι = ∗.
                                                                                                         

Construction C.19. Now that we have the symmetric monoidal functor i : ZFil → Cdef ,
we may induce it up to a symmetric monoidal left adjoint, i∗ : SpFil → Cdef . Tensoring
up to C using c, we can use Construction C.18 to build a diagram of symmetric monoidal
left adjoints,
                                                  c                    Re
                                    C                 C Fil                  C
                                                                  ∗
                                        Id                    i                  Id
                                                  c                   Re
                                    C                 Cdef                   C.

Proposition C.20. Suppose that (Cdef , C) is a deformation pair. Then, the symmetric
monoidal left adjoint i∗ from Construction C.18 is 0-affine. Stated more explicitly, we
have a diagram of symmetric monoidal left adjoints as shown.
                                          −⊗i∗ 1
                     C        c
                                  C Fil               Mod(C Fil ; i∗ 1)                    Re
                                                                                                C
                                                          ∗
                                                      i
                         Id                                             '                           Id
                                          c                                           Re
                     C                                                Cdef                      C.
Proof. Construction C.19 produces most of the desired diagram. The remaining claims
will follow from an application of Proposition A.4.
   Recall that by hypothesis C and Cdef are both rigidly generated. Therefore, in order
to apply Proposition A.4 we only need to check that the essential image of i∗ contains a
family of generators. Since i∗ (Cα ⊗ 1(n)) ' c(Cα ) ⊗ 1(n), this is true by hypothesis. 

Remark C.21. The nth piece of i∗ X can be extracted by taking the C-enriched map-
ping object, i.e. there is an equivalence (i∗ X)n ' MapC (1(n), i∗ X). Now, since the
adjunction i is C-linear, we have an equivalence MapC (1(n), i∗ X) ' MapC (i∗ 1(n), X).
  We close by considering once again the deformation context of synthetic spectra
(Example C.16). Our aim will be to show that we can (nearly) identify i∗ 1 with a
commutative algebra produced via the constructions from the previous subsection.
              GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                              75


Proposition C.22. Given an Adams-type, commutative algebra E in Sp, there is an
equivalence of presentably symmetric monoidal categories,

                              E ; 1τ ) ' Mod(Sp
                       Mod(Syncell ∧           Fil
                                                   ; Sh(τ≥• ; E)(S)).

Proof. In Example C.16 we showed that Syncell  E and Sp form a deformation pair. Using
Proposition C.20 we obtain an adjunction i and an equivalence, Syncell
                                                                    E ' Mod(Sp
                                                                                  Fil
                                                                                      ; i∗ S).
The proposition will now follow from an identification of the τ -completion of i∗ S.
   The identification of i∗ S will follow the pattern established in Section 4. We begin
by identifying i∗ ν(E ⊗k ). By [Pst18, Proposition 4.21] we know that the nth piece of this
object is n-connective. Therefore, the natural comparison map i∗ ν(E ⊗k ) → Y (E ⊗k )
factors as
                               i∗ ν(E ⊗k ) → τ≥• E ⊗k → Y (E ⊗k ).
Examining [Pst18, Proposition 4.21] more closely we can actually conclude that the first
map is an equivalence.
  Now, we can pass to totalizations and observe the chain of equivalences:
                     '               '                     '
           (i∗ ν S)∧ → i∗ ((ν S)∧
                   τ −            → i∗ Tot∗ (cb(νE)) −
                                τ)−                  → i∗ Tot∗ (ν(cb(E)))
                     '                        '                      '
                     → Tot∗ (i∗ ν(cb(E))) −
                     −                    → Tot∗ (τ≥• cb(E)) −
                                                             → Sh(τ≥• ; E)(S).
The first equivalence uses that i∗ is a right adjoint. The second equivalence follows from
[BHS19, Proposition A.11]. The third equivalence follows from [Pst18, Lemma 4.24],
together with the assumption that E is Adams type.                                       

                                          References
[Ada95]  J. F. Adams. Stable homotopy and generalised homology. Chicago Lectures in Mathematics.
         University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1995. Reprint of the 1974 original.
[Bac18]  Tom Bachmann. Motivic and real étale stable homotopy theory. Compos. Math.,
         154(5):883–917, 2018.
[Bac20]  Tom Bachmann. Rigidity in étale motivic stable homotopy theory. Algebr. Geom. Topol.,
         2020.
[BEØ20]  Tom Bachmann, Elden Elmanto, and Paul Arne Østvær. Stable motivic invariants are
         eventually étale local. 2020. arxiv:2003.04006.
[BGI20]  Eva Belmont, Bertrand Guillou, and Daniel Isaksen. C2 -equivariant and R-motivic stable
         stems, ii. 2020. arXiv:2001.02251.
[BH20a]  Tom Bachmann and Michael J. Hopkins. η-periodic motivic stable homotopy theory over
         fields. 2020. arxiv:2005.06778.
[BH20b]  Tom Bachmann and Marc Hoyois. Norms in motivic homotopy theory. Astérisque, 2020.
[BHS19]  Robert Burklund, Jeremy Hahn, and Andrew Senger. On the boundaries of highly con-
         nected, almost closed manifolds. 2019. arXiv:1910.14116.
[BHV18]  Tobias Barthel, Drew Heard, and Gabriel Valenzuela. Local duality in algebra and topology.
         Adv. Math., 335:563–663, 2018.
[BKWX22] Tom Bachmann, Hana Jia Kong, Guozhen Wang, and Zhouli Xu. The Chow t-structure on
         the ∞-category of motivic spectra. Ann. of Math. (2), 195(2):707–773, 2022.
[Bon10]  M. V. Bondarko. Weight structures vs. t-structures; weight filtrations, spectral sequences,
         and complexes (for motives and in general). J. K-Theory, 6(3):387–504, 2010.
[BS20]   Mark Behrens and Jay Shah. C2 -equivariant stable homotopy from real motivic stable
         homotopy. Ann. K-Theory, 5(3):411–464, 2020.
[Bur20]  Robert Burklund. An extension in the Adams spectral sequence in dimension 54. 2020.
         arxiv:2005.08910.
[DI05]   Daniel Dugger and Daniel C. Isaksen. Motivic cell structures. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 5:615–
         652, 2005.
[DI10]   Daniel Dugger and Daniel C. Isaksen. The motivic Adams spectral sequence. Geom. Topol.,
         14(2):967–1014, 2010.
[ES19]   Elden Elmanto and Jay Shah. Scheiderer motives and equivariant higher topos theory. 2019.
         arxiv:1912.11557.
[Ghe18]  Bogdan Gheorghe. The motivic cofiber of τ . Doc. Math., 23:1077–1127, 2018.
76               ROBERT BURKLUND, JEREMY HAHN, AND ANDREW SENGER


[GHIR20] Bertrand J. Guillou, Michael A. Hill, Daniel C. Isaksen, and Douglas Conner Ravenel. The
         cohomology of C2 -equivariant A(1) and the homotopy of koC2 . Tunis. J. Math., 2(3):567–
         632, 2020.
[GI17]   Bogdan Gheorghe and Daniel C. Isaksen. The structure of motivic homotopy groups. Bol.
         Soc. Mat. Mex. (3), 23(1):389–397, 2017.
[GIKR18] Bogdan Gheorghe, Daniel C. Isaksen, Achim Krause, and Nicolas Ricka. C-motivic modular
         forms. 2018. arxiv:1810.11050.
[Goe08]  Paul G. Goerss. Quasi-coherent sheaves on the moduli stack of formal groups. 2008.
         arxiv:0802.0996.
[Gre12]  Thomas Gregersen. A Singer construction in motivic homotopy theory. PhD thesis, Uni-
         versity of Oslo, 2012.
[GWX20] Bogdan Gheorghe, Guozhen Wang, and Zhouli Xu. The special fiber of the motivic defor-
         mation of the stable homotopy category is algebraic. Acta Math., 2020.
[Hea19]  Drew Heard. On equivariant and motivic slices. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 19(7):3641–3681,
         2019.
[HHR16]  M. A. Hill, M. J. Hopkins, and D. C. Ravenel. On the nonexistence of elements of Kervaire
         invariant one. Ann. of Math. (2), 184(1):1–262, 2016.
[HK01]   Po Hu and Igor Kriz. Real-oriented homotopy theory and an analogue of the Adams-Novikov
         spectral sequence. Topology, 40(2):317–399, 2001.
[HKO11a] P. Hu, I. Kriz, and K. Ormsby. Convergence of the motivic Adams spectral sequence. J.
         K-Theory, 7(3):573–596, 2011.
[HKO11b] Po Hu, Igor Kriz, and Kyle Ormsby. Remarks on motivic homotopy theory over algebraically
         closed fields. J. K-Theory, 7(1):55–89, 2011.
[HKØ17]  Marc Hoyois, Shane Kelly, and Paul Arne Østvær. The motivic Steenrod algebra in positive
         characteristic. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 19(12):3813–3849, 2017.
[HO16]   J. Heller and K. Ormsby. Galois equivariance and stable motivic homotopy theory. Trans.
         Amer. Math. Soc., 368(11):8047–8077, 2016.
[HO18]   J. Heller and K. Ormsby. The stable Galois correspondence for real closed fields. In New
         directions in homotopy theory, volume 707 of Contemp. Math., pages 1–9. Amer. Math.
         Soc., Providence, RI, 2018.
[Hoy15]  Marc Hoyois. From algebraic cobordism to motivic cohomology. J. Reine Angew. Math.,
         702:173–226, 2015.
[Hoy17]  Marc Hoyois. The six operations in equivariant motivic homotopy theory. Adv. Math.,
         305:197–279, 2017.
[Hu05]   Po Hu. On the Picard group of the stable A1 -homotopy category. Topology, 44(3):609–640,
         2005.
[Isa19]  Daniel C. Isaksen. Stable stems. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 262(1269):viii+159, 2019.
[Kon20]  Hana Jia Kong. The C2 -effective spectral sequence for C2 -equivariant connective real K-
         theory. 2020. arxiv:2004.00806.
[Lan67]  Peter S. Landweber. Fixed point free conjugations on complex manifolds. Ann. of Math.
         (2), 86:491–502, 1967.
[Lan68]  Peter S. Landweber. Conjugations on complex manifolds and equivariant homotopy of M U .
         Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 74:271–274, 1968.
[Lev14]  Marc Levine. A comparison of motivic and classical stable homotopy theories. J. Topol.,
         7(2):327–362, 2014.
[Lev15]  Marc Levine. The Adams-Novikov spectral sequence and Voevodsky’s slice tower. Geom.
         Topol., 19(5):2691–2740, 2015.
[Lin80]  Wen Hsiung Lin. On conjectures of Mahowald, Segal and Sullivan. Math. Proc. Cambridge
         Philos. Soc., 87(3):449–458, 1980.
[Loy17]  Kaitlyn Loyd. Box Product of Cp -Mackey Functors. 2017. arxiv:1710.08560.
[Lur15]  Jacob Lurie. Rotation Invariance in Algebraic K-theory. 2015.
         Available at http://www.math.ias.edu/ lurie/.
[Lur17]  Jacob Lurie. Higher Algebra. 2017.
         Available at http://www.math.ias.edu/ lurie/.
[Lur18a] Jacob Lurie. Elliptic Cohomology II: Orientations. 2018.
         Available at http://www.math.ias.edu/ lurie/.
[Lur18b] Jacob Lurie. Spectral Algebraic Geometry. 2018.
         Available at http://www.math.ias.edu/ lurie/.
[MNN17] Akhil Mathew, Niko Naumann, and Justin Noel. Nilpotence and descent in equivariant
         stable homotopy theory. Adv. Math., 305:994–1084, 2017.
[Mor05]  Fabien Morel. The stable A1 -connectivity theorems. K-Theory, 35(1-2):1–68, 2005.
             GALOIS RECONSTRUCTION OF ARTIN–TATE R-MOTIVIC SPECTRA                                 77


[Mor06]    Fabien Morel. A1 -algebraic topology. In International Congress of Mathematicians. Vol.
           II, pages 1035–1059. Eur. Math. Soc., Zürich, 2006.
[MV99]     Fabien Morel and Vladimir Voevodsky. A1 -homotopy theory of schemes. Inst. Hautes
           Études Sci. Publ. Math., (90):45–143 (2001), 1999.
[Pel13]    Pablo Pelaez. On the functoriality of the slice filtration. J. K-Theory, 11(1):55–71, 2013.
[Pos11]    Leonid Positselski. Mixed Artin-Tate motives with finite coefficients. Mosc. Math. J.,
           11(2):317–402, 407–408, 2011.
[Pos14]    Leonid Positselski. Galois cohomology of a number field is Koszul. J. Number Theory,
           145:126–152, 2014.
[Pst18]    Piotr Pstrągowski. Synthetic spectra and the cellular motivic category. 2018.
           arxiv:1803.01804.
[PSW20]    Irakli Patchkoria, Beren Sanders, and Christian Wimmer. The spectrum of derived Mackey
           functors. 2020. arxiv:2008.02368.
[ROsr08]   Oliver Röndigs and Paul Arne Ø stvær. Modules over motivic cohomology. Adv. Math.,
           219(2):689–727, 2008.
[Spi10]    Markus Spitzweck. Relations between slices and quotients of the algebraic cobordism spec-
           trum. Homology Homotopy Appl., 12(2):335–351, 2010.
[Tho85]    R. W. Thomason. Algebraic K-theory and étale cohomology. Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup.
           (4), 18(3):437–552, 1985.
[Voe02]    Vladimir Voevodsky. Open problems in the motivic stable homotopy theory. I. In Motives,
           polylogarithms and Hodge theory, Part I (Irvine, CA, 1998), volume 3 of Int. Press Lect.
           Ser., pages 3–34. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2002.
[Voe03a]   Vladimir Voevodsky. Motivic cohomology with Z/2-coefficients. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes
           Études Sci., (98):59–104, 2003.
[Voe03b]   Vladimir Voevodsky. Reduced power operations in motivic cohomology. Publ. Math. Inst.
           Hautes Études Sci., (98):1–57, 2003.
[Voe10]    Vladimir Voevodsky. Motivic Eilenberg-Maclane spaces. Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études
           Sci., (112):1–99, 2010.
[Wen10]    Matthias Wendt. More examples of motivic cell structures. 2010. arxiv:1012.0454.

   Department of Mathematics, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
   Email address: burklund@mit.edu

   Department of Mathematics, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
   Email address: jhahn01@mit.edu

   Department of Mathematics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
   Email address: senger@math.harvard.edu
